https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FI5AUgsp4t0

 It's it's been right here. All right, continue. Yes. Yeah, yeah, I'm not used to it. I'm a father of two now. So congratulations. Thanks. All the sleep I can get it's but it's worth it for this, you know, I just want to say for the just my my wife and my my daughter there at the hospitals, my daughter is having surgery done in the mouth. It's nothing dangerous. And everything. My son is here. And he usually sleeps well. But if if I have to rush away, you know what's going on? Not a problem. Not a problem. Well, I read I read the little that you wrote. Why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Well, so yeah, my name is Adrian. And I'm 30 years old, 31 December. And I was born here in Stockholm, where I live. And that's a notes here. Yeah, I'm the youngest of five children. Wow. Not as big as as you were. So how many children I've got five kids, you get five kids. Yeah, big for modern family, not big in terms of human Exactly. And raised in a suburb to Stockholm really ethnically diverse, like working class background. That's where I come from. My father and my mother were both like active communists, which is not that uncommon in Sweden. We're kind of skewed to the left, clinically speaking for the whole country. And so it's not the most common thing, but it's, it's not completely unheard of. And socialism is kind of a big influence with the whole social democratic party and stuff like that. So although there's debate about what's socialism and so on, but so I'd say, like religious wise, there was sort of a well, at least some dose of arrogance towards religion and and some hostility towards it, you know, as well as Sweden being really, really secular. Although that term for me has now completely changed since I read Tom Holland's book, Dominion, started listening to your conversations about that and stuff. So and then I guess in my young 20 something, something started to change. I am a physiotherapist since seven years now. And being in physio school really opened up some things in terms of well, some things that would like bear fruit later on. And you'll be interested to hear about this, I think in the pain field. Right now, there's a big change going on. That's there's a movement towards understanding narrative, for instance, like the whole narrative around pain. It's really, really, yeah, a growing movement around that. Like researchers and clinicians begin to see the importance of the patient speaking out their narrative and changing the narrative because it's often an unhelpful narrative around around chronic pain, chronic musculoskeletal pain that is. So reconceptualizing pain is a big thing. So I started to think about that. And also, there's interest in that field with consciousness, of course, which ties into that whole thing. And they're really trying to work out many of the issues that this corner of the internet that you are involved in is trying to work out. Fascinating. A lot of things I wrote some things down here, you know, for instance, this pain of a purpose. That's one thing. This can we speak of it having purpose? Well, that would mean that the whole like standard model of how we view things today needs to change because we can speak about purpose in terms of evolution and stuff like that. And understanding emergence because it's really popular right now to speak of pain as having emergence qualities or the brain having emergence qualities. And then, you know, we sort of need to inject some Jonathan Peugeot into that conversation. I know, but what does the what does it emerge to what this what does it mean from about with the emanation? And so that's one thing. Understanding the placebo effect, of course, is is is another. So listening to those topics, thinking about that, trying to work out that in clinical practice, trying to I've always been really focused on engaging with people not doing a lot of manual therapy or exercise. I mean, that's, that's the easy stuff. I've always tried to listen to people and help them work out their story. And that, I think, set some things up for later on, because I was really into the four horsemen, you know, like a lot of people follow them really skeptically minded, scientifically minded, and found some, I guess I found a narrative in that as well, and something to something to live into. But then when I when I met my future now, present wife, and started thinking about having kids, I mean, all these all these questions about meaning, purpose, what is life for? All these things came to the fore and really developed into well, the meaning crisis. I mean, you know, you know, all about that. And and I don't know how things happen. But you know, I stumbled upon Jordan Peterson, you know, like a lot of people do. Some weird clip on YouTube where I was watching some atheist debate, I guess. And, and I was never really interested in the in the political stuff. All the way I have changed dramatically, politically as well. I mean, I was an active communist once. And it's, that seems super far gone right now. I mean, I feel I feel, I feel a bit more conservative. Let's let's just put it that way. I could imagine. And yeah, so the biblical series was was big for me. I think I watched that like four or five times or something. Really thought about those things and discussed it with with a few people who are close to me and try to work those things out. And I think I don't remember who was it. Maybe it was rationality rules who talked about the staircase. Jordan led people up. Yeah, maybe there was a door there. The door that CS Lewis talks about in his books, you can open and maybe you'll find something there. And I found myself going up that that stair because like one of the things Jordan said really stuck with me is like, is there has to be something to us like, it's lines like that, that over time, changes you together with you have a sense of that you need to change the narrative and the way you the way you exist. So I was going through all that. And then I think I don't remember what order things happen, but I stumbled across you. And that's been really, really helpful. And Jonathan Peugeot, of course, and some other folks in that area. Things been things have been happening and you know, change change happens over a few years. And weirdly enough, I find myself as an as an orthodox catechumen. My goodness. And it's it's so I don't know how to not even even conceptualize things. We're not right now. But yeah, wow. So what was it? What was it like going to church for the first time? And how did you choose one? Well, I went to like the Swedish, let's say, state official church, it's now Yep, officially separated from from the state. But not really, I guess, when I was on paternity leave with my with my son. Because they have an open open like preschool for kids. And I was then at the point where I wanted to start to somewhat participate. You know, not just having it all up here, but I lived bodily reality. Yeah, I remember sending a sending an email to Jonathan Peugeot actually, and like, like writing down my story shortly and just thanking him and asking him for some tips how to move forward. And I was thinking about maybe he'd recommend a book or something. Then he said, I go to church. And we at the time, I was like, Come on, come on, I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna go to church, you know? Yeah. And then then I found myself after maybe a year or so like, okay, I probably need to, it didn't seem healthy, honestly, to just keep things in the head because in the mental space, because that created sort of a rift. Yeah. So so I went there. And, and that's, it's, I would say, I don't want to be too critical. But it's it's quite secular. That church, it's quite political as well. Yeah. But at least, you know, you talk to people, you talk to priests, you talk to other people, they're kind, you you get into into a relationship with people. Yeah. And still felt very weird, but less weird, you know, than before. For a short time, I went to to a Catholic church, just attended mass a few times, spoke to the priest, and then into that, the the orthodox church where I where I'm at right now a few times. And honestly, it feels it feels weird. But but but I don't trust that that emotion that much. And it's not only weird. But you talked before about losing losing status, becoming converting or speaking about religion in depending on of course, on what what circumstance you're in. But I'm experiencing losing status to myself, you know, to my to my baggage to my old old self. Yeah, yeah. It's a weird. It's a weird thing. Well, it's, you know, that's built into that's built into the Christian story. Because Christ loses status. I mean, Philippians to, you know, starts did not consider equality with God something to be vain, something to be grasped, maintained, but made himself nothing taking the, you know, the status of a slave, by which God raised him up. So it's that there's a lot to that. And for someone living, I would imagine, probably, I've never been to Sweden, I don't know that much about the country. But I would imagine, just in secular society in general. Yeah, you lose status. Because you so you go to this place on Sunday, at least in the United States, there's enough of a there's still enough of a community that does it that depending on the microclimate that you're in culturally, but I would imagine in your case, but but at the same time, given what you've said already about yourself, about, you know, the physiotherapy, and about pain, you're already you're already sort of biased towards making sure your mind doesn't get too far ahead of your body. Yeah. Yeah, because I have the tendency. Yeah, I have the tendency, but and you've been very helpful here. I think you you've been very helpful here, recognizing parts of that and speaking to, for instance, what we just talked about how weird it can be to go to church and how church is actually not full of only holy people, but people from all walks of life who maybe you don't want to engage with or and all of that. And so it's been it's been an attempt to temper to temper all of that. And I mean, I just I just contrasted with I remember going to to a baptism for a friend of my wife, maybe like six years ago, before all of this started to happen in me and just feel always felt so like partly annoyed and partly like completely not understanding the words that are spoken in church now. Yeah, they're just gobbledygook. Yeah. It's repeating phrases that seemed completely meaningless. And now, on the other side of that, it's a yeah, it's a vervecian opening, you know, yeah, reciprocal broadening. Exactly. When I hear those words, and it's, it's, it's weird going through those changes. But but I'd rather felt find myself on that side of the equation, you know, and, and the other side and well, good, good. And I just, yes. So right now, I mean, I'm in medical school since a couple years back. And some some of my thinking is trying to trying to like, apply the whole symbolic world symbolic lens to my future medical practice. And you know, you encounter some, some resistance there, not that I'm outspoken with it, but you get you get infused with a certain, certain type of thinking and a mode of being, I would say. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I'm a studies. So so I'm trying to work that out as well. So the, the process from the physiotherapy on to medical school for you, that's, that's a fairly natural process in terms of you reach a certain level, and then you can go back to school, usually in the United States. I mean, anybody who becomes a doctor, they just sort of get submerged in the institution for 10 or 15 years, they come out a doctor, but it sounds for you, it can be a little bit more of a process. I had to, I had to go back because I didn't have enough. Okay, credentials. So I had to go back and do like a year of that and working part time. So and it took me maybe four or five years to decide to do it. So it's been a it's been a that's been a journey as well. But okay. Now I'm on now I'm in and you know, it's like a tube of toothpaste, someone so you know, you, you get out the other side once it's once it's squeezed. So yeah, that sounds that's I've never heard that before. But that sounds about apt, I would imagine it takes pretty much everything from you that's in you just to get through it. So that sounds about right. Well, thank you for your story that that was really, that's really quite remarkable. What did you have in mind for our talk today? And you probably have a list, but where would you like to take this? I I was listening to I was listening recently to to the discarded image. As an audiobook and funny, funny, funnily enough, I saw the conversation between Andrew with bangs and Richard rolling as well. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That was a difficult book for me. It was a difficult book period. It was written for scholars. And I was like, Oh, good. Yeah, yeah. I didn't know it was an audiobook. I didn't even know that I just I read it the old fashioned way. Probably more helpful many times, you know. And so he he in the epilogue. And during the book, he talked about the models that we have. Yeah. He contrasted the medieval model to the modern one. And he said something interesting about models and how they are updated and how new ones come about. Yeah. And partly this this question is relevant for me to understand my story. But I think this is going on on the Yes. societal scale as well. Yeah, you know, we've shifted model science, maybe you can see the starting by like 1500 year 1500 or 1300. Or I don't know, somewhere around there. And he said something interesting that it doesn't there's a bi directional movement between models and us models change us but we also change the models. Yes. And nature, which is our sister. Yes, not my mother has lots of phenomena in stock. So depending on the model that we walk around with the glasses that we wear, or how you want to conceptualize it. Nature can can reveal different phenomena to us. Yeah. And he said that it requires a change in the temp temper of mind. And perhaps a change of heart as well. For a new model to come about. And I'm trying to work out a bit more about what in the underlying stuff has changed over the last perhaps few hundred years, I guess, that makes it possible for us to explicitly have the beginnings of a new model, because I see us moving away from modernism. Yes, perhaps via post modernism and and Peugeot says that the world is being re enchanted. Modernist would say that subjectivity is coming back in, like that's a negative thing. And how do you how do you conceptualize this? And how do you how do you think about it? Well, you'll, you'll probably enjoy tomorrow's video, because it's about two and a half hours of this. So I am leaving great, leaving on vacation tomorrow. And I don't know what how many videos I'll do while I'm on vacation, because videos are always just thinking, but I'll have, I have different responsibilities while I'm on vacation and different, I won't have all my equipment there either. So, but so I just finished a video on which I'll probably if we decide to share this, it would be quite a bit later because of just probably how I manage videos. And I usually don't put I do usually don't put conversations in quite as quickly as I put the others. So I just did a video on though you're in Sweden. So this is this is even more fun. I've been watching the History Channel in the United States has done a series, a television drama called Vikings, which begins at, you know, begin sort of at the raid at Lindisfarne, and then a lot of the engagement between the Vikings and the Saxons, and then the Franks around the year 800. And then also a, I started watching that when my wife tested positive for COVID. So I suddenly had, you know, I could watch what I wanted to instead of negotiating television viewing with my wife and children. And so then recently, I've been watching The Last, The Last Kingdom, which is on Netflix here, which is a story set around 1000 AD, surrounding a Dane, someone who was born a Saxon and then raised a Dane, and the cultural back and forth. The second program. I didn't I don't like nearly as much because although the Danes are sort of nested within a religious worldview that comes through from time to time in the show, usually inconsistently, the Christians in the show are are remarkably corrupt in that only fanatics really believe and usually the fanatics who do believe are using it as a lie. And then there are something like that. And then and then some of those even a good character who does believe there's this one monk who is a friend of the main character. He seems to believe but you find the Christians in that story, not quite knowing how their religion and the worldview of a very brutal age actually go together. In Vikings, it was a it was quite a bit better, both on the Viking side and on the Saxon side on the Christian side. Both sides, at least the story was trying to work out how to integrate those things. And so the video the video is about this will this will probably be redundant to people who watch this if it gets shared because they'll say yeah, I saw that I saw that video that you did. I started with Peugeot and Richard Roland talking about the medieval period. And the the observation that Richard Roland made about you know, the question why someone asked him a question, why do all of these why does so much fantasy why so much fantasy sort of located in a medieval period. And then the the rest is history podcast by Tom Holland and Dominic Sandbrook did an episode on Game of Thrones, which I hadn't watched Game of Game of Thrones at all an HBO story. But I thought why is this history podcast doing something in Game of Thrones and they also went into this question of these Tolkien Game of Thrones and then they didn't mention these other two series are quite a bit smaller. We're looking back at this medieval model, which of course, in the discarded image, Lewis is wrestling with Lewis is also looking back at the medieval model model because the medieval model managed to according to Peugeot and I think he's right about this, managed to achieve a synthesis that, you know, was was certainly imperfect as Lewis acknowledges a synthesis, but it was something that was deeply meaningful. And Lewis Lewis actually says that in the discarded image at one point, he talks about how that model and Lewis right, you know, Lewis says, well, we know, you know, certain aspects of it are obviously wrong in certain from certain viewpoints, but that model afforded tremendous meaning to those who to those who lived it. And, you know, one of the one of the things that I think one of the contributions that Jordan Peterson has made has been the recognition, which should be obvious, and for the same observation that meaning is fundamental for human flourishing. We you know, when Jesus says, you know, man shall not live by bread alone. But every word that proceeds from the mouth of God. Well, what is what is the relationship between meaning and that word that proceeds from the mouth of God? Because we can't live without meaning, we really can't. We don't flourish without it. We we wind up this is where you get to vervekis reciprocal narrowing, we wind up sort of like a, you know, it's interesting during COVID. You know, there's this there's this, you know, we've seen how some people are asymptomatic, they don't even seem to become, you know, they're asymptomatic, they might not even become infected. And others completely fall susceptible. Now, quite clearly people who have very active, robust, healthy immune systems, generally speaking, have no problem with the virus. Others, you know, have a great deal of problem with the virus, and it becomes can become life threatening. It seems meaning a life filled with meaning is sort of like having a healthy, robust immune system in the world, it makes it makes people healthy and robust in order to manage the trauma of this world, the pains of this world. And this becomes especially evident when you look at people like the four horsemen of the New Atheist Apocalypse, which didn't prove to be too much of an apocalypse. Because in the end, in the end, whereas they, you know, they shown for maybe a decade, you know, they are increasingly diminished by this point and continue to diminish. And, and their diminishment is not raw at the hands of a tyrannical religious establishment, which would be what they might say, you know, would topple them. But their diminishment seems to actually come from the science that they promoted as the answer. And where, you know, just as in the story you described, various scientific disciplines are getting to the point of looking at enough data and saying, well, we don't know everything. And what if it in fact is the case that the that that meaning and story are integrally involved in human flourishing, even at the level that we, you know, a level that can be measured and tested. So and this shouldn't come as any surprise. So, you know, social scientists for years have been noting that religious people out, people who practice people who have disciplined religious practices in their lives, generally speaking, outperform people who don't in measurable ways, they live longer, they are happier, I would I would say more robust when the kinds of normal traumas assault us, which which inevitably come in life. And again, anybody who looks at this story from even an evolutionary posture, might begin to say, well, it stands to reason because the world seems filled with what secularists look at as religious people. Where are all the thriving atheist communities from antiquity? They they, you know, you find little bits of atheism here and there, but they don't last long. And they're usually swallowed within the sea of religiosity. So it, a lot of people get anxious about the future of religion, seems to me, there's nothing to be anxious about, because you should far more far more be anxious about the future of atheism, because it just doesn't seem to endure much among human beings. And part of the difficulty that we have is, we live such short lives. And the data set of our anecdotal circle around us is so small. But yet, that's how we have to navigate. And so it's, it's fascinating to me watching these conversations work themselves out. And then, you know, part of what's been so strange about my life over the last few years are, you know, these conversations. So I figure out a way to sort of keep a door open to randos, you know, people who I don't are nowhere in any relational circle of mind that can approach me to talk and then listen to stories like yours doesn't strike me at this point now doing it a few years is in any way unsurprising. So I'm, you know, I certainly celebrate your story. But three years ago, I would have, I would never have imagined your story. But now there are whole groups of people who are coming to some of the same conclusions that you are, and even in a place like, you know, like Sweden, it's, it's an astounding thing that I don't know if enough people are paying attention to, but I'll pay attention to because I'm not in charge of most people, I'm just in charge of me. So yeah, that was good. That was helpful. I thought about one thing you said there in the beginning. And I thought about this before. I think CS Lewis, again, actually talked about this. We don't we wouldn't feel satisfied with only social utility of religion, no. Oh, it helps people to feel happier, give to charity, so on. We want it to be true. But then again, we have to but then we have to ask the questions, what does it mean to be true? And how does reality function? And yeah, those are the things that interest me a lot because and that's where we talked about Jonathan pattern, pattern, pattern, pattern, the apostle of the apostle of purpose, the apostle of purpose. I call him Jonathan, the way reality lays itself out. Pajow. Phrase he often uses and it's good because I think that's for like modern, scientifically minded brain. That type of thinking really helps. It's it's systematic. It's also a phrasing which doesn't trigger the normal, you know, normal allergic reactions to to religion. I think you spoke about this in one of your recent videos, the wording is very important. Yeah, very, very helpful in that sense, because he has come up with different sort of vocabulary for these things that open things up for us again, if we and just like, speaking about, yeah, like using a Greek term instead of a an English term, it can really help because no, this is this is new, this is fresh. And I see that in my, in my story as well. I came across one thing today during a lecture that we had, we're into like biostatistics, statistics and ethics in research and stuff like that. Talking about how you can't live within the scientific paradigm. I'll quote the lecture here. It talked about actually the the the metaphysics, the metaphysics behind modern day medicine. And he said that the mental is a epiphenomena or shadow phenomena of the physical. Something happens in the brain that gives rise to an experience, something mental, which in and of itself is causally impotent. The mental has no direct effect. There is no mental substance that has an effect on the physical, not the bottom layer of things. Everything and all including our our experiences of reality is a result of physical causes. For example, things happening inside of our brain. And this is good, he said, because this idea is not dualistic. But the mental is an epiphenomena. It's not dualistic. He then actually mentioned the placebo effect that it would go against all of this, and that we're, we're not really sure of how to understand consciousness. So he was a bit aware of this. But I thought about three things immediately. What about what about the placebo effect? Where the meaning is, is the causal agent, you would say. And that, if, if everything arises from like dead material causes, what does that say about our theories of the world? They're being real or not? And why should we trust them? And isn't the whole and lastly, isn't the whole world, like, the whole world we live in proof of the opposite of that statement? I mean, how we have, you know, gotten the mental into the matter and changed everything. It was weird. I was, but I wouldn't been able to see that from maybe three years back. Yeah. I had an inkling back, back then, but not the vocabulary to actually see it and go, wait, this is, this is actually wrong. And it's, and it's, like you said, especially with your, your third point, it's dramatically strange. Exactly what you say, given the world we're living in, you're, you, you're in a room full of an enormous, you know, full of people who are sacrificing an enormous amount, the whole tube of toothpaste in order to become something. Did you all just eat a soft boiled egg on the same day and that, you know, therefore doctor, I mean, that's just, you know, why are my hands moving right now? You know, you hear, you know, somehow you physically cause something through the internet, through zoom that made me have an exclamation in my hands moving. So I'm, you know, if given that worldview, you would have to say that I am somehow causally connected to zoom and my responses are being transmitted physically and that that's, yeah. Have you read, have you read CS Lewis's book miracles? Yes. And yeah, because this is what he goes into. And this is, this is the, this is sort of the paradigm that he begins the book with and says, well, this is sort of, this is sort of what the world teaches now, of course, with emergence and these, you know, these newer, these newer physical isms, they try to get around some of these things, but you almost have the sense that you almost have the sense of the, you know, the early Copernican, the early early Copernican mathematicians, the pre Copernican mathematicians just trying over and over and over to extend their old model. And it gets to a point where everybody just gives up on that model because the math is better the other way around. And I think, I think that is what is sort of causing the age, you know, the age of modernity to, to slowly dissipate. But these things, these things do slowly dissipate. I mean, and again, we're very short lived creatures. So we, we give, we live in just a portion of it. But you know, Lewis is such an interesting case, because he saw these things quite early. And he wrote about them quite persuasively and that has to be, you know, many people have noted that CS Lewis is a very strange hero for especially American evangelicals, because he believed in evolution, he, you know, there are a whole variety of beliefs he had that don't really that don't necessarily fit well with dominant evangelical dogma, you know, that he had. And he was a dominant, a dominant, a dominant, a dominant, a dominant, a dominant evangelical dogma, yet he's a hero. And we don't quite know why, but we know that he is. And so we go on from there. But so much of life is like that. We like to walk around imagining that we know what's going on, we're in control. You know, that's, that's almost pure rationality. You know, my wife regularly exclaims how irrational I am about this or that, or this or that. And I certainly see that in her. It's probably the case that we're both quite irrational. But we have this delusion that we're walking around of our own rationalities. When even, you know, even sympathetic observers look at us and say, don't really understand you that well. But and you certainly don't seem as rational as I would like you to be. But now there it is. Yeah. That's fascinating. That's a thanks for sharing that story with me about the lecture, because yeah, yeah, that is, that is the modern could have been, it could have been Sam Harris. Yeah, yeah. Well, and it's in medical school. And that model then has implications for, you know, so I, you know, I pastor a church of mostly older people. And so now that they're into their 80s, they spend a lot of time with doctors and in hospitals. And this, this physicalist model. Yeah. But it and I regularly see the limits because, you know, we have, I think, quite good medical care here in Sacramento, it's very expensive, expensive, but it's very good. And all you know, very, very often someone goes in to the doctor to the hospital, they are experiencing a symptom. And, well, they're going to try this, they're going to do this test, they're going to try this, they're going to try this, they're going to try this. And okay, a lot of trial and error going on here. So that physical ism that you're talking about is levels of complexity beneath what any of us can really know. And, and their their lives, you know, well, people who have smoked all their life, well, they tend to have higher rates of lung cancer, and heart disease and stroke. Yeah. But when you walk into, when you walk into a doctor's office, the doctor is getting this time cross section of now, for which 80 years have built up to it, and 80 years of enormous complexity. So they might be a smoker, they might be a diabetic, they might be all these different things, but they've got all these other different things. I mean, it's just, it's amazing. It works at all. We reduce it. Exactly. Exactly. People don't die all the time. We tend to reduce things, you know, I have this, I have this shoulder coming in at 11, you know, like a whole universe, a whole cosmos of a person being reduced to, to a joint, you know, that's just classic. It would be a horror film if only a shoulder came into the room. Where's the rest of the person? That's hilarious. And what you said about that has implications. Yeah, I'm quite, I'm quite, I'm aware of that more more now. And it's a bit disheartening, actually, to see. It's, it's, there are the things that, that are on the on the positive side, you know, talk a lot about delving into the patient's perspective, and a lot of those things. But I think we're, we're confused, because we, we, we contradict ourselves. On one hand, you say that, okay, it's about the patient, it's about this, it's important to get their side of the story. But if we really get down to it, to it, the world is meaningless, we're all just stuck in a body experience and a movie, hopefully, it's a good one, you know, and it's this dissonance has to create issues somehow, you know, it's not it's not healthy. It's not, it has implications. It affects how we are we act in the world, it has to do. Yeah, it's so true. And and yet, you know, modern medicine has, I just look I just look at the advances in my own lifetime, I look at the advances in the 25 years that I've been pastoring this church, I mean, the advances in treating prostate cancer, the advances in treating all sorts of cancers, I mean, they're dramatically better than they were two, three decades ago. And, and so, you know, so if I'm hanging out with all the secular materialists, you can point to those things and say, wow, that's, this model has tremendous power. And the medical establishment is a very impressive thing. And if you're hanging out with all of the symbolists, you know, they both sides tend to lob at each other, but kind of in the middle and say, at the same time, you know, there's someone who take the take the situation of pain, again, as a pastor, people, sort of like a doctor, people come to me when there's something in their life that is stuck. And often, that will be especially with an older congregation. With younger people, it tends more to be relational things, which are really more difficult. With older people, it often tends to be physical things, financial things, relational things, too. But by the time people get into their 70s and 80s, a lot of the relational things have sort of played out. You know, the 20s, 30s, 40s, 50s are heavy relational years. And then there's 70s, 80s, they've already been down and then we stabilize. Yep. Yep. So it's, you know, pain, chronic pain in people's lives. I once you get into your 70s and 80s, there's certain things that they're not going to get fixed. You're just gonna have to deal with it. You're going to deal with it until you die. And so, you know, I've seen people who've, you know, been on, you know, constant pain medication. And so it's, boy, it's a big deal. It's a big deal. Yeah. So we've got about, we've got about five minutes left. So any things on your list that you really wanted to get to that we haven't touched on? An endless, endless list. I think that that's, we'll save it for another conversation. For me now, it's dealing with being, I find myself being in the same situation, I guess, as a lot of the early Christians. I'm in a pagan family, in a pagan society, although the situation now is different, because the society I mean, I view it as it's within Christendom. It's not as Christian anymore, but it's within Christendom, somewhat. But it has a lot of pagan influences. And my life has taken some quite dramatic turns. And a lot of those relational things I'm working on, but that's a conversation with my priest, you know. And that's why Jonathan said go to church, you're gonna need a priest, you're gonna need a pastor. I mean, you're gonna need somebody. And Peugeot and I, we can't do it. Yeah, it has to be face to face as well, you know. Yeah. Which this whole COVID thing really, really shows us, I think. Yeah. Yeah. And it has to be, you know, one of the differences, you know, so when I started doing these conversations, some people would say, well, you're kind of doing therapy. And I said, no, not really. Therapy is a specific thing. You know, what you do in ministry is, it's far, therapy is in a box. You know, your life with your priest, your life with your church, it's much more out there in the wild. It's multi-dimensional, it's multi-layered, it's communal, it's individual, it's all of those things. And it goes on in terms of time too. So, no, that's right. That's right. No, that's right. That's right. Just on Pentecost, Job, who's been on my channel, he's from the Netherlands, made profession of faith in his Dutch Reformed Church. And I had talked to him and he was, you know, what should I do? And I told him the same thing. I said, well, he says, well, what about church? I said, well, what's close to you? Why don't you start there? And for a lot of people, like in your case, you know, you got to start someplace, but then you keep journeying until you find the right home. And then, and for Job, I asked him because he had, he was a volunteer firefighter and he had other firefighters. I said, do any of the people that are in your fire brigade, do they go to church? Oh yeah, a bunch of them. I said, go to church with one of them. You know, start with a friendship. And, you know, sometimes it'll take a while, you might start with a church and you realize, no, this isn't the best place for me. And I take a few hops like it did in your case, but those who seek find those who knock the door will be open. That's the promise. That's the promise. So, well, thank you so much for this. This is, this has been a delight. Thank you. Thank you. I managed to, to get a slot, you know, so I took the chance. I'm glad you, I, I often just do Wednesday slots, but I, you know, in anticipation of my vacation, I wanted a few more randos conversations in the, in the, in the can. So I will send you this video and you can review it with anyone else who you would want to share it with. And if you think that this is something that you would allow me to share publicly, let me know and I'll post it on the channel so others can watch. Great. We'll do it that way. Sounds good. Thank you, Adrian. Thank you for these last few years that I've been able to, to observe you. It's been a pleasure. I'm glad you're here. Thank you for your time. I'm glad to observe you. It's been tremendously helpful. Thank you very much. Get a good night's sleep. Yeah. Okay. Thanks. Take care. Bye.