https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mgalVsc-LRs

 Hi, this is Paul. Yesterday I made a video, Rationality Rules Crying Game Moment with Jonathan Pujo, Superthing Theism Debunked. Actually it was Pujo doing the debunking in that video that that Pujo is doesn't believe in a conscious God, but yeah, it was interesting. Yesterday Jonathan did his question and answer on he, as he usually does on YouTube, and expressed in it both he and and Stephen Woodford's, oh, unsettledness let's say about the response of the video. I think this is normal for when you do important work because both of them sort of stepped outside of their respective comfort zones in some ways. And I thought the video, even though in some ways it was disappointing and disappointing in a predictable way, was actually quite important. And so I've got a little bit more chewing to do on this video. I in some ways haven't been this excited about the IDW protocol since 2018 before the decadent book tour. So I thought this was a good faith, vulnerable, transparent, authentic attempt at two people coming from very different spaces. And a lot of people questioned my non-dual comments. You know, in a sense, yes, all all true naturalists or materialists are non-dual. That's the whole point of the enterprise. And there are many dualities that we wrestle with and not all of them are bad. But what the part of what we're wrestling with in our contemporary frame is a pretty severe duality between heaven and earth. And so Jonathan Peugeot's mission in many ways is to demonstrate that the, and I think he's exactly right about this, that the story of the Bible is the story of the reconciliation of heaven and earth. That's the rupture that happens in Genesis. It's the rupture that's resolved in the book of Revelation. So no, I think I, you know, anybody who interprets what I have to say, yeah, I can be a little cavalier and a little clickbaity with some things. It was a crying gay moment. Jonathan, you know, was revealed to have something that Stefan didn't know he had. And I could point to Mary Cohen in this moment in terms of the kind of language she uses. So, and some of you saw my kind of one of my conversations with Mary about this. So I, again, this is fun and no disrespect towards any of the parties involved. I think we're doing some work here. So let's keep it up. Let's see. It takes time for the significance, the sign of something like this to emerge. I remember when I first first listened, my first run listening to Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson's conversation in Vancouver, that's Vancouver one, Vancouver, Vancouver two, and then they went to London and Dublin, I believe, for a three and four, not in that order necessarily. But, you know, my first time through, I was frustrated. And, and then third or fourth time through, I began to see more. And then the conversation lifted out new things. And, you know, at the end of that conversation, Brett Weinstein said, I think we've done something. I thought you haven't done anything, but no, I think they did. And I've gotten stuff out of that. So, no, this was, you know, yeah, there's frustration because I, and I agree with a lot of the commenters, but of course, I'm not, I'm not unbiased in this. I agree with a lot of the commenters that I don't think by virtue of the revelation of the crying game moment that, that Stefan really understood exactly who Jonathan is. Now, Jonathan's not easy to understand. And some of the comments in my video bore that out. This, this takes some work. And it's a good sign that it takes some work. It can't be dismissed easily. And I thought both of these individuals were trying to do something fresh and helpful. And I think it's really important. So, so, so yeah, it's important. Don't stop. I wanted to have, for those of you watching or those of you listening, don't see it. I have a good, you know, I'm just getting in touch with some of my freesian roots here. We've got a dairy cow chewing on stuff. Well, why do cows have so many stomachs and why do they chew the cud? They're getting every little bit of nutrition out of this thing. And yeah, it might just have looked like sort of a, a common theist atheist conversation, but I think there's actually stuff in there that upon further chewing, upon further reflection, you can find. Now, those of you who are unfamiliar with my process, I make monologue videos kind of for you. And I keep sharing them because many of you say that they're helpful and you've appreciated them. I sometimes wonder why they would be because I'm basically thinking out loud. And the truth is part of why I do this is because by the end of the video, I will have ideas and insights and know some things that I didn't have before. So my processes that I make, I make a PowerPoint to at least sometimes give somewhat of a bit of order to my ADHD rattled brain, addled brain, and at least provide some kind of track to follow that hopefully at the end of it, I'll produce some nutrients out of the whole thing. So I always learn something by the end. And, you know, I've been reading the comments. It was very interesting comparing the comments on Jonathan Peugeot's page versus the comments on Woodford's page. You know, and this just sort of reinforces the comments I made on Rebel Wisdom not long ago that if you want to, okay, of course, you know, a big part of Rebel Wisdom's focus has been sense making and implicitly that's a part of it's a big part of Jonathan Peugeot's contribution in terms of of revivifying symbolism and symbology as sense making. I mean, that's that's in some ways really the heart of his channel and his contribution. And so, you know, I continue to chew through that. But as a pastor, you have to construct and maintain and contribute to a community and one of the vital one of the vital necessities that communities afford are sense making because as human beings, our cognition is distributed and the networking is done by language. And again, as I mentioned in my last video, this is sort of this the human superpower that that the rest of the animal kingdom does not possess. And it's a magnificent superpower. And so YouTube is not a community. You YouTube can be a platform for creating and maintaining and trying to create communities. Now this now this word community is an awfully fudgy word. It's sloshy too. And again, fudgy. We when we fudge, we use a bit of willful deception in order to advance an agenda. Sloshy is that the word is beyond us and we can't quite contain it and stuff spills over and it's messy and it becomes unbalanced. And so that's sloshy, sloshy versus fudgy. And those of you who followed my channel for a while know that I use these as sort of symbolic, imaginative words that that grasp at certain aspects that I don't necessarily have a better word for. So, you know, what I've seen is that, you know, on run my channel and I can't speak to to to rationality rules as a community, but, you know, definitely around the symbolic world and around my channel and the bridges of meaning discord, we've we've we've been working on community and community involves a certain degree of repetition of showing up in a place repeatedly and contributing something. A lurker isn't really participating in community. They're sort of feeding off community and even a financial contribution and stake because where your wallet is there is your heart also and if your heart really isn't someplace that your wallet isn't. And so, I mean, there's all these aspects and layers to it, but these communities are vital and central for for for establishing a coherent meaning making a world of meaning that you can inhabit because we and I've made this point for years in terms of the church. People say, well, I want to believe in the Bible. Well, you're only going to believe in the Bible if you're in community with other people who believe in the Bible or you're only going to believe in the resurrection or you're only going to have the tangible hope of resurrection that is real enough to to to galvanize you against the acids of normality and the age of decay if you are standing in a community that is working on it, but but that community also does does chewing and processing and ironing iron sharpening iron and conflicts and all of that stuff is the messy business of human community, but you need that community for meaning making and so again just really impressed and gratified at the level of seriousness and discussion and conversation that have you know YouTube comment sections can often be cesspools, but but you know this conversation launched some things, Jonathan and Stefan, so don't be discouraged. You're doing the right thing. Keep at it. It's important and and again I think you know my my opinion of Stefan, Stephen, Stefan, I don't know which it is, has changed and and that's good. We should be open to change and we should part of the problem of these little projected stereotypes of individuals is is we don't let them change, but those you know let rationality rules and Stefan and Jonathan let them change in your mind and and let's grow and migrate together. I think about you know the the times just by virtue of the community formation I did you know whenever Jordan Peterson came near me I'd get the VIP ticket and I'd go and shake his hand and I always just say thank you for the learning because you know these last three years have been you know it's sort of neo getting plugged in and learning jujitsu. I mean I feel that for me in some ways I've been plugged into the internet via YouTube and you've been plugged into me and it's just been a it's just been a learning process, but learning takes time. We think slowly and and and you got to chew you got you have to chew there's no replacement for it and and we need the cow needs all those stomachs and and this is the this is the process that we're working working in and and what we're working towards together is um truth beauty honesty all these things. Now now Burn, Burn Power and if you're not he's only got he's only got about 500 subs on his channel that really surprises me and those of you out there that love long videos man I don't hold a candle this guy this guy's got long videos and and Burn has a tremendous wealth of knowledge and lived history and and music and culture and art in the 20th century and he's just sharing it on his channel from from Till from I notice I can't say it correctly from Tbilisi Georgia but anyway his comment I thought was really helpful he said I found it fascinating that Stefan kept saying that his ideas came from being a product evolved in the natural course of events interestingly Jonathan was quick to point out that concept was anything but natural let me read that again because it's really important um the the the anadromist is is is Burns channel I found it fascinating that Stefan kept saying that his ideas came from being a product evolved in the natural course of events interestingly Jonathan was quick to point out that concept was anything but natural ideas do not come from evolution especially if evolution as Lewis often points out cannot mean improvement remember and and another person made a comment evolution isn't you know well how did he say it shoot I see when I don't it's it it colonized me but it didn't fully I mean evolution evolution is in a sense of tautology ever the relationship again between evolution and survival it's a tautology what does it mean it's it's it's the same thing and and that's the point here that it's not progress it's not um it can't mean improvement because and this is what Peugeot keeps coming back to with respect to evolution where's your scale evolution is a tautology it's it's saying okay and and to a degree we can say well the the beaks of a certain finch are more adaptive to the time yada yada yada but it's not necessary you know all all this improvement is sort of within a black box and it's all sort of gyroscope instead of actual much larger frame orientation it's a product of scale so my camera just distracted me I don't know I have a box on my camera for focus when I I usually don't I my sister who runs another YouTube channel just bought the same camera as my brother-in-law has and I commented to her I started using this camera and I still haven't taken the time to explore it and learn it sufficiently anyway I digress you see why I do PowerPoint because I distract myself it's really a curse anyway we are not progressing saith the Darwin but we are changing justifying materialistic philosophy as a natural result of a progressive evolution is the least natural thing that one can imagine evolution. Touche! Critical hit by Byrne! Yeah! That's that's exactly right. His notion of having his ideas conditioned by evolution alone means that he isn't taking into account the effects of philosophy, psychology, or propaganda which is of course a big theme in Byrne's channel. And this this gets into the question of I gotta get there with with CS Lewis's miracles I mean in some ways my entire channel is is footnotes on CS Lewis's book miracles in many ways that's how deeply that book has colonized me and continues to colonize me. And so Arthur Range and this is on Jonathan's comments the evolved primate to the left lives in a story of being storyless. Now you know let's let's resist some of the left right stuff because you know on one hand yeah it's relevant but on the other hand that that process leads to decay or to decadence in some ways and decadence in both sense of the word because it can make you rich. And it backs itself into a corner in some ways and that's the you know the the relationship between religion and politics is that politics is always shallower. Politics has a very short shelf life politics decays quickly that's why whenever Jordan Peterson gets overly political he gets decadent because his you know what he's doing is decaying whereas and this gets back to Nassim Tlaib's Lindy effect. The older things endure they're deeper they're truer they're they keep coming back around they're enduring and and again this is this is in some ways the the revelatory function of time for those of us who are very short lived very time conditioned creatures living in fast changing cultures. The faster the environment moves the more attention you should pay to things that aren't moving very quickly in other words very old things that have continued to endure. Anyway so so Stefan I assume he's he's writing through his own channel it concerns me that this is one of the highest rated comments here it means that I either did a very poor job of conveying my position or a lot of people simply are not listening. We all have a fantasy about other human beings we have a fantasy about reason we have a fantasy about words and and the idea is that if we if we sufficiently communicate and others sufficiently listen then somehow I think we're not listening to the people who are listening to us. And others sufficiently listen then somehow I think the idea is we transcend we transcend what is common and sometimes banal to humanity. The illustration I like to present to this is Jesus Christ he's Jesus muggling I'm no no smuggling just because and this point I think atheists and skeptics will enjoy but it's the one I often use with Christians because people Christians and atheists like to imagine this fantasy that somehow. We have the power to just speak the truth and everyone will listen and then everything will be okay. And and I think this I think this is particular I think this temptation and this fantasy and this delusion is is particularly present among Protestant preachers. Okay we should always first call out our own. Because there's something there's something deep in Protestantism which is this way because we imagine that if I can craft the perfect sermon and if I talk to my congregation endlessly in some ways this was part of the besetting sin of the early Obama years because he was so articulate and so good with words he thought he could just talk America into whatever he imagined his ideal would be and what we find is that reality and people are not listening. And it is far more resistant to us than we can imagine and that is a good thing because none of us are God but the whole story of Jesus asserts that God himself takes on flesh and in three years of ministry talks to people and his words he doesn't even record them himself his followers record his words and they are handed down to us through the Bible and so skeptics and atheists can do what they want. But if the son of man if the son of God could stand up on a hill and talk to people and not somehow colonize and dispel them in fact have all of the kinds of reactions that we find in the Christian canon where first he attracts huge mobs because he speaks as one with authority but the more they listen to him the more troubled they are and eventually most of them walk away a lot of that based on what he says and he's not going to be able to do that. Based on what he did because he understand that they were in it for the fields and in it for the money that in some ways he wasn't a grifter but they were grifting off of him. And he dies only surrounded by people of such low status that. The authorities who were killing him didn't care they were there. So. In case you imagine that saying the right things or the magic words will somehow change the people around you instantly and magically I present to you Jesus Christ who has been changing people for two thousand years based on the words recorded by his followers. But who he himself was crucified. So. Yeah talk we will do frustrated we will be talk we must it's the only path forward listen we won't. But it's the only path forward so please don't stop talking you two and I talked to Jonathan Stefan if you ever want to talk to me I talked to randos so and if you think it'll be a good idea to talk to me. I talked to randos so and if you think it'll devolve into some shouting match go look up my conversation with vows. I'm I I can be a little I can be a little. I can be a little cheekier a little bit of a jerk on YouTube but the people around me know how I am I could be a little bit of a jerk in person to. But fear not. Back to C.S. Lewis who was again if you haven't read Lewis. Yeah yeah. Lewis is very smart dude consciousness reason and truth aren't aren't these the the aren't these the the hallowed at least two or the three or the hallowed ideas rationality rules natural naturalistic assertion says that the whole show is a product of the mind. Purposeless emergence leveling up in complexity that's that's the assertion that's the thesis. But it is not the product of purposes of in guidance and otherwise in other words sort of purpose of ness is are these tiny little things within the much larger thing of course if you read Lewis and miracles. Again you know when I John Jean-Philippe Marceau what a great guy. JP JP is a good guy. You know he wrote he wrote another piece responding to the conversation that that that verveke and I and he did about miracles and I really want to come back to miracles not just the book but the idea and the concept because all of the things that I've read about the concept because all lots of lots of good stuff coming up in there anyway. What what what basically happens if you embrace the naturalistic assumption is that these tiny little these tiny little elements of rationality and agency and purpose of ness are just these tiny little islands these tiny little abnormal specs in a sea of deadness. And and you can't help but set up for yourself a meaning crisis whereas obviously if you're some kind of a Platonist or a Christian that that reason is emanating from above and at the heart of Peugeot's. You know I mean Aristotle is all over these conversations in a lot of ways that if you need somebody outside of Christianity to pay some attention to because at the heart of Peugeot's thesis is that you know. The the the all of this stuff that the the rationalist skeptics are are promoting as the solution can't be derived from below and not only is the understanding of consciousness the hard problem but the relationship of consciousness to truth is the hard problem and any kind of confidence in reason is a hard problem. All of these are tremendously hard problems if they come from below. Not if they come from above and and so it's a deep irony that the community that is that has the biased against anything from above. Keeps promoting what basically they're stealing from above and if they are in fact only coming from below they can only be tiny temporal islands of truth reason and consciousness that will be destroyed by the age of decay and die in the heat death of the universe because according to all of the systems that they have from below these are the things that they are dependent on. And if you see it this way it's no surprise that these little bits of atheism we find in human history always get snuffed out just like they are imagined reason islands and bubbles just sort of pop and this moment of truth and reason that a human life is a problem. This moment of truth and reason that a human life is dissolves and is eaten by worms. That's why you have a meaning crisis consciousness is the forum in which we either act this out or act as if depending upon where you're standing with this stuff. Now. Pause for a drink. Now people worry that Jordan Peterson smuggles Jesus. Well that's just sort of how it ends up isn't it and how many of you out there. I mean there you're popping up on the bridges of meaning discord and you're saying yeah it was Sam Harris and it was Sargon of a cod and then Jordan Peterson and then verveke and then Vanderkley and Peugeot and the the certainties that I felt five or ten years ago I no longer feel that way now why not. Well and in many ways another one of the quests of this channel has been I as a Christian minister watch Jordan Peterson converting people. I wasn't doing it not like Jordan and Jordan's not a Christian at least not a confessional Christian like like I am at least he won't take that stand publicly or align himself with a particular church and the reasons for it. Yeah because that would you know all that stuff we've talked about and that's fine. I'm not trying to you know I'm not trying to corner him or pressure him or anything like that. I'm just noting what he's been doing and there are a couple of interesting papers blog posts that people have pointed me out about young and so definitely have more work to do in there. But the Jordan Peterson Jungian insertion into Stephen stack Stephen Woodford stack was really interesting and and it gets to the point of oh be careful little eyes what you see and see us lose this point. Oh be careful little atheist what you read because these ideas have power there are principalities and powers and they will colonize you. Hopefully they won't possess you because possession is what the devil does and Jesus just gives you agency baby. He gives you agency he gives history agency and and it's reciprocal narrowing versus reciprocal broadening. And again if you know you've got to watch the the 50 hour long verveky videos to get pointed to that. But you know archetypes are seen as blindly emergent but adaptive and therefore affording value and and it reduces the the the dismissive attitude sported by new atheists and you know we've been what's been fun about you know what's so fun about this conversation is is that. Why why the Peugeot Woodford video is not boring is it because is because neither. And again we look at them both and we're not saying yeah Peugeot is about to give up God or Woodford is about to give up atheism. It's that both went into deal logos and tried their hand at it honestly and in good faith and and even if. I don't know a whole bunch of symbolic metaphors come to mind some of which are not suitable for work. They couldn't sort of find each other maybe the crying game is the best one they couldn't sort of find each other figure out who each other was but they knew more after the conversation than they knew before. And they had a healthy respect for just how difficult this is and that this in fact will take work and that for anyone who decides to go down a path a fruitful path. Well the story of Genesis three holds there are briars and thistles and that will be by the sweat of our brow that we actually produce something so yeah. Oh be careful little mind what you see Oh be careful little conversation what you enter into because we are not the dominant powers of this world ideas have people people don't have ideas principalities and powers are real. And they're not in some dualistic way simply separated part of the non dualism that Peugeot brings and has really helped me with there's a lot of my thinking about spirit and understanding what how we use that word and what we mean by that word you can think about all my school spirit. Illustrations is that we can get some purchase on these things not to wield and in fact the more the better and the more we understand spirit and its power the more sober we are because we realize that when we as C.S. Lewis noted when we enter into and begin to engage with someone. And as Tolkien noted we don't know where it will take us once Frodo opens the door to the dwarves. And then they all leave and then what does Frodo do. Why does he bound out of Hobbiton why does he join the dwarves on their adventure messy adventures hobbits say who would want to go on an adventure that would spoil you ah but. Isn't this why we're alive doesn't suck doesn't something took ish deep in each of us took ish doesn't something took ish each deep in each of us want to go on this adventure. Don't you want to smuggle something. Don't you want to read in that part of the library. Mr. Potter which is off limits. Of course you do. Isn't this why the gargoyles are on the cathedral. Yes Jordan Peterson if you don't want. If you want to stay in your nice skeptical Hobbit rational your rationalist Hobbit hole don't listen to Dr. Jordan Peterson and in many ways the more you hate him the more he will infect you. And if you think Jordan Peterson is scary. You should try Jesus. He's been colonizing people for 2000 years. Now the thing that Peterson brings to mind I think is. A hugely important and legitimate point. God and I put God in quotes because Jordan is in some ways a contian as some of these things have pointed out. A consummate contian as Bishop Barron has pointed out because Jung was a contian and they're trying to stay on a certain side of a certain line. And so we'll keep God in quotes and if you listen to Jordan especially in his early days talking about the resurrection and talking about all sorts of things. One of the ways and I was mystified by that line but eventually I was able to get to the bottom of it. One of the ways and I was mystified by that line but eventually I learned because I'm slow. I am not the sharpest tool in the shed. Many of you are smarter than I am and have gotten to certain conclusions long before I will get them. But I'm just me and I can't be anybody but me. So here I am. And so whether or not however you stand with respect to let's say the ontology of the divine. And again I'll not interrupt myself too much. The ontology of the divine the usefulness of it in terms of an essential cultural theoretical philosophical element. Basically according to Jordan Peterson if you want to actually build a healthy civilization is beyond dispute. Just this morning I I quoted on Twitter a Peugeotian tweet such as said something to the point of dark rebel and I forget the third word he used. You can't build on these things. You can only deconstruct with these things. If you want to build on something it's going to have to be firm. It's going to have to have light. It's going to have to be the things against which others rebel. And that doesn't mean that rebellion is negative and it doesn't mean that darkness is negative just like Peugeot wouldn't say feminine is negative. You just have to understand how it functions in reality as things are laid out. So given what human beings are from below. Basically trying to build a society without God is sort of like trying to compute without a GPU. Well you've got a CPU but you've got the master and the emissary. And if you want to do all the graphics heavy lifting and yes I know there are issues using computer analogies for human beings and I use them rhetorically because we are far far more complex than computers. But the way analogies work is we talk about far thing things far greater than us and boil them down and reduce them in ways so that certain analogies can be had. And as as my friend Brett Sackold had noted. Well analogies always distort just as they enlighten. That's sort of the nature of reduction. But the problem with getting rid of God is that you're taking whole areas of your brain offline. And that's part of the problem of this cult of rationality that the servant as someone had. Again this was a quote in one of the in one of the comments an Einstein quote I don't know if it's true or not. You know that this great gift which is the intuition we've we've deprecated and now only follow the servant. And as I've said in many of my videos what what really irks people and really sort of bothers the skeptics is all this relay relationality that somehow Christians and and new agers and human beings can somehow relate to the relate to the divine and the divine will relate back that we can scream to the universe and the universe will respond that nature is perhaps not quite as disenchanted as we imagine. It would be. And my point again that this is the spirit of finesse and the spirit of geometry that we approach we approach complex entities in our relational sphere in our consciousness forum. Relationally why do we do that we are employing all of the machinery and again I will employ a fancy verve key term. Exaptation which I learned from watching his emerging from the meaning crisis. We have all of this we have all of this relational machinery built in not only into our brain into our culture into our distributed consciousness to leave all this relational machinery. Unused if we want to engage in the biggest most important conversations in existence which is in fact how we relate to the whole show. We're going to leave all that power alone. No and this is why well there's something to be said for what we do when we cover the eye of the manifest image and look out through the scientific image there's something to be gained by that. But you will lose your depth perception you need to incorporate both things both both hemispheres of the brain must be engaged and so if you're going to relate to the universe you'd best relate to it relationally or you're just using a tiny bit of everything that you have. God in quotes is simply too useful a conceptual device to do away with. I think in many ways this is the heart of Jordan Peterson's contribution something that we had forgotten. Now there's good reasons for what we've done and we have been blessed and cursed by it both but there it is. I'm pegging my mic. I'm loud. I'll turn it down. We can't speak without implying purpose. We can't live without imagining purpose. It's relational it's purpose of the manifest image will be the dominant frame in which we live. There is no escaping it and you cannot live that way without imagining. Well you can but why would you want to. Yeah you can get along with that crappy integrated GPU that that Intel will give you. But if you really want to play your computer game with 60 frames per second on that 120 Hertz gaming that gaming monitor you're going to want that big fat Nvidia G or Radeon GPU in there spinning out that stuff. So why do you keep just trying to do it on your CPU rationality and truth. Now having said all that let's give the enlightenment it's due and the Protestant Reformation. They didn't arise for no reason and the verveke and demand of ringing BS out of the systems vitally important. This is not theologically unwarranted either this this this bar field and see progress is a little bit too linear. It's much more of a tick tock. A tick tock of initial participation loss of participation. Now of course we're looking for this sounds a little hegelian. We're looking for final participation. We're trying to figure out OK we're we're we're enchanting but we're you know there that we're going overboard we need to be pulled back and so some of the discipline brought into the system is helpful. But again with each movement as with all human activities there's over correction there's overreach back and forth we go back and forth we go. And so the human heart is deceitful says the Bible. Who of us doesn't benefit from the sciences and the technology and the civil liberties that that came out of the philosophes and the enlightenment and and and all of the stuff that grew out of there. We have and and now again I think we're here at the end of modernity we're trying to figure out OK how do we reintegrate. And will we lose much of what we much of what we gained in this period and it's it's scary terrifying stuff but nobody said that being a human being wouldn't be scary and terrifying not using conscious not now to again using consciousness assess and move forward. And so in many ways Peugeot and and Woodford these are two good guys to to work out some stuff otherwise you know Peugeot is out there in his symbolic world and and Woodford's out there and his rationality rules you're hard pressed to find two. Who are emblematic of two different places in the ecosystem now in many ways what we've been doing is putting together an ecosystem and so you know for for Woodford for Vickie would be a little bit too new agey with his with his eastern mysticism and his and his martial arts and accept you know. Yeah but if you're going to contend with for Vickie he's read a lot of stuff and he's very smart and he's very rational and he knows a ton of stuff and so yeah you're not going to get you're not going to get away with too much stuff with for Vickie around and you got JP Marceau out there and you got Peugeot out there and and you've got don't forget Sevilla. You know I always get that a quality exists don't forget Sevilla and Sevilla and Persig and and that whole corner and and you got Mary there who can who will talk about the crying game in ways that I'm sure I can't imagine and her devotion to Ratzinger and you've got a you've got a you've got a dumpster welding. Right up in there in Manitoba and you know we've got you know trust in the force Luke in Minnesota and and Joe over in the Netherlands. So what we're trying to do in all of this is take all these various elements and try to construct a whole and and even if Peugeot is not about to deconvert and even if Woodford is not about to you know knock on the door of some Anglican church with Tom Holland and say I believe the conversation is important for the rest of us to to work out because we've all got these Peugeots and Woodfords in our little consciousness convert Congress and so what happens when these two talk is that something important where we're working out our stuff vicariously because our consciousness is distributed. And you know we have to talk about the patriarchy and the LGBTQ stuff we do and and you know I before I found Tom Holland I made the same point this is the patriarchy and the LGBTQ stuff and we have to talk about the patriarchy and the LGBTQ stuff. We do and and you know I before I found Tom Holland I made the same point this is this is Christianity bringing this stuff forward and yes the Roman Catholics and the Orthodox will say oh cursed Protestantism that brings these things to us along with new atheists and atheism and of course the skeptics and the atheists say I'm not the product of Protestantism. Oh yes you are. We're trying to find our way and so let's talk. Stephen says you know these issues are not incidental in his mission. Ask yourself why not. Now apart from the politics and all that more shallow stuff why these issues now with these issues those are the important places to look. Whichever way you go on same sex marriage yada yada yada yada ask yourself dig deeper into these issues and say what is going on here what can we learn by them. You're not going to dispel them with fancy words and arguments the issues will be with you don't waste your troubles John Piper says and he's exactly right about that phrase great phrase. The revisiting religion point is not lost on me with any of this. You know as a as a as a Protestant minister I can't duck these issues they're all around me I have to engage them. The culture war is a Christendom civil war. These issues are telling in terms of the competing imaginaries the tensions the tensions are being expressed and love demands we work on them. And yes I am a Protestant a politically Protestant a politically moderate American Protestant. Who I am it's what I am. So keep talking and I think maybe I'll have to say welcome rationality rules to the IDW. Because this is the hope for the IDW protocol. And yeah there'll be some political stuff in there. Yeah we'll have to talk about the patriarchy and LGBT and Donald Trump and Joe Biden and Brexit and all that. And COVID and yeah we'll get all those stuff. But all those are in the narrow those are in the shallow political waters. But sometimes you have to go through the warm shallow surface to get down to the colder deeper older waters upon which the warmer surface waters exist. All sides grow if we can do the deal logos. And as a Christian I am confident. Why. Because I believe history is purposive from the beginning. I believe this is not just random and we are not little islands of random truthfulness floating in a sea of dead chaos. I believe there is a future I believe there is an eschatology and I believe that the one who walked out of the grave depressing the ground bending the grass is the key to the reunification and the renewal of heaven and earth. That's what it means to be a Christian. But I love talking to skeptics and I want them to make their best argument. And I want us to talk together and I want us to get a little upset and I want us to pull our hair out and maybe say some cheeky things and some angry things and I want all of that to happen. I want the passion I want the adventure I want to fight trolls I want to slay dragons. Don't you. If you don't. Unsubscribe.