https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=3WuGxM2uoNo

 Hi, this is Paul. A lot of people have noticed in the comments section, we talk about this fairly often, and I bring it up, that that lack of telos or ends, ultimate goals, is the great Achilles heel of every secular moral system. And, you know, we've been dealing this with Jordan Peterson stuff and John Vervecky. Everyone wrestles with this in a secular system. You can't help but wrestle with it because there are, in a sense, no guiding stars. C.S. Lewis, in two of his books, In the Problem of Pain, in the first chapter, I've noted this in a variety of other videos, not only are there the five senses, he sort of outlines two more. There's the sense of the numinous he talks about, and moral intuitions. And it's really in The Abolition of Man that C.S. Lewis gets, works on what he calls the Tao, which is, he says, traditional morality. And in the appendix of The Abolition of Man, he goes through and shows commonality between many, many moral systems, and he calls this traditional morality. And he's talking about Gaius and Titius, two textbook authors who attempt to basically say that we just have mere moral feelings rather than intuitions of truths that are out there in the world, but we can't fully, we don't really fully grasp them, nor can we explain them, but they are, in fact, out there. We all know it, and even as Lewis notes in that very small book, The Abolition of Man, we all know it, but attempts to free ourselves of it are always based on it itself. Our attempts to update it or improve it are always based on the same Tao. In other words, there's no escape. Now, for Jordan Peterson, his maps of meaning, meaning for Jordan Peterson is sort of an internal compass, and that's broken down in one of his 12 rules, do what is meaningful and not what's expedient. Meaning for Jordan Peterson is an internal compass which will lead you towards opportunity, wellness, goodness, et cetera. And Peterson, again, I often call him sort of an open agnostic in this because he doesn't really fully, he doesn't want to fully be embedded or buffered within the secular system. He lives within it for his science, he plays within it for his vocation and all of that, but he always wants to leave the door open, and you see this consistently with Peterson. But yet, we're worried about our guiding stars. And so Peterson, part of the reason he does the biblical series and works on this is because he has the hope that the Bible, via his ideas about how, via his Darwinian ideas, that perhaps the Bible can offer better wisdom because, again, it's very ancient, it's battle tested, it's endured. And so in that sense for Peterson, it's Darwinian. It's Darwinian. We have reason to believe the old book. But the attackers of Jordan Peterson are doing what they feel to be meaningful as well, and attacking Jordan Peterson feels meaningful to them. And this is part of the problem with using meaning alone as an internal compass. And again, I would say that Peterson doesn't want to do this, which is why he does biblical series. That there's a piece of him that's longing and hoping that the Bible can be for him what it is, for what he might say is naively for other believers. He might not even use that term naive. So Peterson's just such a liminal figure in many of these conversations. And so that's part of the reason that he gets pulled into this battle over the Bible, or traditional morality, because Peterson, you know, when it comes down to it, he's sort of a scientific traditionalist. Now John Vervecky's work, as we've been following his video series just recently, he talked about Telos in one of the videos. And again, John's whole project is to create a religion that isn't a religion. There's no confidence in systems built upon God number two for John. He's very clear about being a physicalist, yet he respects religion. And so John's working very hard in his long argument about that. And so his goal is to build a system affording what religion had afforded. But his construction of it is scientific, using cognitive science and philosophy. And it's from below. And the goal of that is to keep it scientific. And therefore, I think in many ways in this secular realm public. Now at the end of this video, I'm going to play quite a bit from a podcast that, a couple of different podcasts that Tom Holland has done, because I think that's very helpful in terms of understanding what secular is and the relationship between Christianity and secularism, which is something that I've been talking about throughout my two years of making videos. But I think, again, part of John's project is, you know, if there is no God number two, if you are not a theist, then it is up, or at least a theist of a certain kind, then it is up to us to save ourselves. And then the question is, can we create these communities and these wisdom institutions and these practices in order to, and can they be disseminated and will they go viral to sufficient degree to save ourselves from the troubles that we are facing? And I think this is one of the serious challenges that the world faces and one of the serious challenges. I mean, John and I disagree on whether you can continue to go back to these traditional religions, of which I obviously am a part, or must we construct something new? And do we actually have the wisdom and insight and capacity to construct something new that can address the world in the way it needs to be addressed? Now, before I had software problems, I had made a video on this conversation between Steven Pinker and Jordan Peterson. Let's see, I'm trying to remember. Okay, this conversation between Steven Pinker and Jordan Peterson. The Enlightenment project for Pinker has given us what we need, Pinker says, and the world has improved dramatically. Now, again, part of the reason I recommend John Vervecki's series is that whether or not you necessarily agree with the, let's say, the outcome of his project, which is a religion, which is not a religion, John does so much helpful teaching along the way. And again, so many of the things that I've picked up along the way in John's course, the understanding of categories and relevance. The world has dramatically improved. We might say that, but it's interesting because others, of course, are saying that we, 12 years until the end of the world, 12 years until the point of no return on climate change. We've been living in a nuclear age, as C.S. Lewis calls it, for quite a long time now. People perhaps have more material well-being, having mode, and perhaps being mode. So it'd be fun to have Pinker and Vervecki have a conversation because the dissonant voices that we hear, things are getting better. Things aren't the way they used to be. Things are getting worse. As a pastor, I hear all the time from people, sometimes with a theological spin on it or an eschatological spin on it, well, things are getting worse and worse, so Jesus must be coming soon. I remember my parents' generation hearing people of that generation saying that. I just can't believe that Jesus won't come before the year 2000 because things are getting so bad, he just has to come back. What's funny is that the older I get, the more and more I wonder, well, how can the world go on? There are so many problems. Maybe it's just a function of age that I see the problems more clearly. But Pinker is, you know, people sometimes comment that I'm such an open, friendly, optimistic guy. Well, Pinker's kind of like me in that sense in that he's very optimistic and he's very friendly and he's very open and he just, oh, things are getting better and we're doing great and poverty is being reduced and, you know, we're going to solve, we're going to find technical solutions to all of these problems. Now, I played a good bit of Brett Weinstein's Four Frontier video in that talk and I thought that was a tremendous talk. I really learned a lot in that talk too. But, you know, can we find technical solutions? Well, these bottlenecks that we run into and, you know, we seem to, human history seems to have, you know, for particular groups, again, you've got the whole problem of categorization in there, but a group finds, I mean, Europeans find North America. And I really enjoy that book 1493 because Europeans come and basically, through a lot of death, especially at first, so many people died in those early colonies, but basically, you know, New England stabilized and eventually the drug cartel of tobacco really got going and tobacco, you know, made the mid-Atlantic and southern states rich on getting the world hooked on nicotine. So, you know, then America took off and the Europeans terraformed the rest of the continent. Last weekend I had a church trip up to Portland and I was looking around that city and I thought that in some ways this area feels so much like the East Coast because they get rain unlike we hear in California, the Golden State. What people don't tell you, if you're not from California, is when we say Golden, we really mean brown dormant grass because the state is covered with so much of it for so much of the year. But Portland was so lush and it had the sense of, well, this is sort of like the East Coast, but on a bigger scale, bigger trees and bigger mountains and just beautiful, beautiful country, but very much terraformed from the East Coast, which apparently came over from Europe with the ships, of course, at the expense of the indigenous population that we supplanted. You know, so we find technical solutions to face these challenge and we look at improvements against poverty, but we also look at other sorts of problems like the burning of the rainforests and on and on and on these debates go. So Pinker is a full member of the IDW. I don't know if anybody's keeping score on that anymore. He's the IDW-ish, is the IDW-adjacent, but even so he's very much on the sunny side, which makes him and Peterson an interesting pair because Peterson is, of course, a little bit more pessimistic, a little bit more depressive, a little bit more dour, and they've had a number of conversations on and off and I've found those conversations interesting and I want to play some of that, but they share some of the sunnier IDW optimism for the world of technical improvements against poverty and some of these other things, but Peterson is, of course, more sober. Peterson, of course, fears that the West will lose its way and succumb to the bloody postmodern neo-Marxism and whereas you'll hear Pinker really try to diminish the role of Christianity and the Enlightenment, Peterson with Ben Shapiro, Ben Shapiro, of course, is the member of the IDW who's actually a religious practitioner. So Peterson very much wants to bring in Judeo-Christian, that whole theme into it and so let's play some of that because that's a good conversation and they begin with what I'll call contractual nationalism versus ethno-nationalism and yeah, let's jump into that conversation. If it is the case that people are more likely to be generous to those that they see in some sense as their in-group, then what it suggests is that you need to take the mosaic of your culture, the African Canadians and the European Canadians and the Asian Canadians, the same in the U.S., and have them maintain their culture and their traditions, but also to embed them inside a broader game that constitutes the national identity, that unites them all despite their differences and it seems... Now, I think what Peterson is promoting here is a sort of narrative nationalism, that, and I think Peterson is right with this and David Brooks often strikes this theme on some of his work that, you know, story is the machine code of identity for human beings and so if human beings are going to bond, there really needs to be a story within which we are embedded and in that sense we can in fact create family members. He goes back to the Darwinian position that, well, there seems to be a biological mechanism by which we prefer blood relatives to us, but by use of a story, story verse can trump, you know, and we know this, story verse can trump kind of the biological levels and the genetic levels and via that way you have the hope of maybe having productive, fruitful nations. This, of course, is something that David Brooks has spoken about quite a bit because what he's seen and I think what Peterson shares in a lot of this is the idea that a lot of the social justice factions, what they are doing is attacking the narrative stories that have traditionally sort of bound nations like the United States together and if founding fathers are dismissed as slave owners, which, you know, Jefferson and Washington were dismissed as slave owners, dismissed as contaminated and illegitimate because of their moral behavior, the question is then what container then allows the various ethnic, blood-related, racial or whatever identity story is operating? Can you in fact find a united narrative that brings the group together? Now, I'm going to assert a little bit later on that the the beginnings of this story in many ways on the world scale come with Christianity because what happens, and you see this in the New Testament, what happens is that now you find Jesus saying it, God can raise up children out of Abraham. It is not the blood of Abraham that matters in order to create the new family of God, the new chosen people, the new priesthood to the nations. It is now the blood of Christ, but when we say the blood of Christ, we don't mean literal blood of Christ because to the best of our knowledge, Jesus left no children, but unlike Genghis Khan, but Jesus through that story and through the breaking of the bread and through the rituals, what happens in that religion, and I think Adam would be very excited to hear me say this, what religion does is takes disparate groups of people who are not biologically related and binds them into one community and one family through a story, and this is what happens in the New Testament, and if you have eyes to see this, especially in the book of Acts, you'll find this over and over and over again, the Ethiopian eunuch goes, now I know many of you don't know too many Bible stories, well you should read your Bible and learn them because these stories are in fact the basis for much of our civilization, but the Ethiopian eunuch, where's he from? He's from Africa, okay, he's an African slave, now he's an African slave of great wealth and power because slavery was a different thing, but Ethiopian eunuch was an African slave, well how do I know he was a slave? Because he was a eunuch, because unlike, let's say, the Bidens or the Trumps, one of the ways that they prevented the servants of the empire having split loyalties was they castrated them so they wouldn't have children, it was a corruption protection strategy, and so the Ethiopian eunuch is an African slave of immense wealth and power who somehow had heard about the Jewish God and so travels to Jerusalem, but he gets to the temple and he realizes because he's altered something that is against the mosaic law, the Ethiopian eunuch is not allowed to enter into the temple to worship as a believer, as innocent, he can never become a Jew, so on his way back from the festival in Jerusalem, of course, the Holy Spirit sends the deacon Philip and Philip is running alongside the chariot and the Ethiopian eunuch is trying to read the book of Isaiah and Philip says, do you need any help reading this? Now Philip has a Greek name which leads us to believe, like all the deacons, that Philip's background is he's got Jewish ancestry but he's culturally very acclimated to the broader Eastern Roman Empire Greek world, so he's the perfect guy to engage this Ethiopian eunuch in talking about, okay, what does this book of Isaiah say, and then of course he talks to this Ethiopian about Jesus for whom the Ethiopian's castration is no longer an obstacle and the Ethiopian says, what is keeping me from being baptized? And Philip's like, nothing, and so he is baptized and that's the story in the book of Acts, but you find the story in the book of Acts again and again that this whole idea of narrative nationalism actually comes from Christianity and that's what we have been practicing in the West, that you can be a citizen of the United States without being from a particular ethnic group, now of course the United States struggled with this, but the idea is that what holds us together is a common story, so in some ways American, the American strategy of e pluribus unum, out of many one, is a borrowed idea from the New Testament and from Christianity and this is in fact what Peterson is proposing right here to Steven Pinker. the counter-enlightenment of the 19th century by the romantics and the nationalists. Now it's interesting because you would have to ask the question, well where does the enlightenment get this idea, and again I'm arguing that you can find this idea very strongly in the book of Acts in the New Testament and in the Apostle Paul. That a state, a group of people under the jurisdiction of a government are held together basically by a social contract, by an agreement that we're all in this together, there are many public goods that we share, public costs that we can suffer, a government that allows us to get along by serving in our interests is a way of improving our wealth here. Now what's interesting here, what he's taken is a narrative and he's turned it into a contractual situation. Now the thing about a contract, these contracts tend to be short-term. I often talk about this difference, let's say in the difference between a covenant which is a marriage and a contract and what's happened in fact to marriage in America is it has gone from a covenant which is till death do us part in sickness and in health for better, for poorer, you know this is this is idea that come what may I will be with you, that's a covenant and even when I get the short end of the stick I am giving myself to you, that's a covenant. A contract is sort of as long as this is working for me I'm in it but so right now I've you know every two years I sign up for my contract with AT&T or Comcast or Verizon and at the end of the two-year mark when my contract is done I go shopping and what I often do is I'll switch from AT&T to Verizon back and forth because these businesses are giving incentives to hop from the other person so I just keep going back and forth so I was on Comcast now and on AT&T but I really like that fiber so I'll have to see you know I'm going to go visit for Comcast and say hey this is the deal I got from AT&T can you make this deal better then I go back to AT&T and say hey AT&T Comcast is offering this can you make that deal better you know I just I play one against each other that's the contract now what you see is that well we sort of have a contract as nation but identity and our lives are not anywhere near as portable as my phone as my cell phone number with AT&T or Verizon and in fact because I'm not portable and and so part of what happens with nationalism is nationalism also becomes sort of a pseudo religion because it affords me an identity I'm an American and that identity is is not you know is not contractual so much as covenantal and and so it's interesting where Peterson was talking about a narrative in which we're embedded now Pinker comes up with something much more contractual which I think is is quite a bit weaker it's a very different conception of a nation than the blood and soil nationalism of the 19th century continuing well into the 20th okay but now what what what Pinker is saying well there's contractual nationalism versus ethno-nationalism but what about narrative nationalism I mean it's not we we tend to always look at dualities because we have a difficult time keeping many things in our mind at at once but I think we can move up to three here and so Peterson starts what about narrative nationalism as opposed to ethno-nationalism and Pinker says well contractual nationalism but I don't think contractual nationalism and and narrative nationalism are really on the same page because of the differences that's a between a covenant and a contract and what makes us a nation is that we're all we're all white we all speak we come from the same ancestry and that the successful nations are often ones that manage to forge the somewhat artificial identity so that's also fascinating because then okay then we got okay it's forging all identity I think right there Pinker sort of gives away because I you know sometimes people will try to derive an identity from are you an android or an apple an ios person well that's a little bit deeper because your at&t and verizon can come and go but you stick with apple or you stick with android and so again when we talk about identity narrative creates identity much more than contract two arguments here for that for that for that let's say artificial or conceptual nation building process one is that maybe you can allow people in their different ethnic and racial groups to maintain key elements of their identity and and and feel comfortable doing so but also embed them in a broader game like a game voluntarily played and laid out but see now now Peterson is trying to nuance the conversation he's had very much narrative nationalism Pinker had contractual nationalism now Peterson's well let's talk game instead and maybe we can nuance these two things together and maybe we can find some common ground exactly by the same token given your logic that's also the most effective antidote to the kind of nationalism that is identitarian that also seems to be in the resurgence and you see this I really see this as having been done extraordinarily effectively in the United States now they had the advantage of the examples of England and France but that the American you know but you know we had some of the mechanics of England and France but England and France were also to a degree well they were empires we're going to talk about empires in a minute but they were fairly homogeneous at least as compared to let's say what America had to deal with in terms of the well they were British colonies at first but you know Germans came over you know African slaves were brought over indigenous peoples were in America so on and so forth experiment was an experiment in conceptual nation building it's like here's the state of principles that we can all agree on despite our differences and to the degree that we decide that we will agree on these principles then we're the same enough we can cooperate we don't need to revert to nationalism or or very much now now it's it's important with the American experiment to recognize that what one of the things that America did was religion again had been the thing that had bound people together and gave them identity before in Europe there was European before there was a France and in England and a Spain everyone was Christian and it was their Christian identity that brought them together and the church after the fall of the Roman Empire was the institution that facilitated this great identity thing in Europe and of course what happens in America to try and address the ongoing religious violence that had been happening in Europe was at least at the federal level they had in the American constitution the establishment clause where the country would not establish a state church America would not use religion as a foundation for establishing a common identity now one of the things that you notice in the history of the Protestant Reformation is that the Reformation really takes hold in places where nations aren't as you know France was already well along the way in terms of being a nation and having a national identity England was well on its way and the the process of the English Reformation was very different from that of let's say the Holy Roman Empire where the Reformation begins Spain of course manages to resist the manages to resist the Protestant Reformation the the Frenchmen like John Calvin who find themselves out of step with the regime in France become refugees in Switzerland in some of the French-speaking areas of Switzerland and of course John Calvin then more or less is able to colonize Geneva in his quest now I just noted that I was just doing a little bit of work on Voltaire and Rousseau and noted how Rousseau grew up in Geneva in a little bit after Calvin's regime but very very interesting so what happens in America is again another step in terms of secularization that sort of what Americans do that it's while there's a there's a strong deism in the Declaration of Independence the American Constitution is is godless and secular where there's a creator in the Declaration of Independence there's no god in the Constitution and intentionally so now that didn't mean that in early conceptions that the states couldn't have their own religion because of course the the you know the the Puritans and the Pilgrims in New England were were reformed and you know you had different things going on and with Quakers in Pennsylvania and Rhode Island and you had Roger Williams in Rhode Island who really brought some of the religious freedom from the Netherlands and you've got the you know the Anglicans in Virginia so all all of this stuff all of this stuff is all of this stuff is going on but again this American experiment is another developmental step in secularism which sort of works on the question this tension between a narrative nationalism and and a contractual nationalism now the deists Thomas Jefferson writes the Declaration of Independence very much borrowing it from John Locke very deistically you'll notice though that as as the you know certainly by the time I was growing up in the 60s and 70s you had schoolhouse rock and you you had full-blown American you had full-blown American narrative nationalism in place and and that was you know that's very deep in the American consciousness before we continue with these two however I did want to talk a little bit more about empire though because what they're really talking about in terms of binding people together is empire so I'm going to use a little bit from Yuval Harari's Sapiens because this I I appreciated this this little section he has about empire and empire is a political order with two important characteristics first to qualify for that designation you have to rule over a significant number of distinct peoples okay now these are different ethnic groups these are different tribal groups they have to rule over a significant number of them each possess possessing a different cultural identity in a separate territory how many peoples exactly two or three is not sufficient 20 or 30 is plenty imperial threshold passes somewhere in between second empires are characterized by flexible borders and potentially unlimited appetite they can swallow digest more and more nations and territories without altering their basic structure or identity now in terms of the bible empire is a very interesting term because when you come to something like let's say the book of Daniel and have Daniel 7 where these monsters come out of the sea in Daniel's dream these monsters are empires and what they are consuming are nations people groups and and the theme about empire is a very interesting one throughout the bible now the Israelites get their own empire under David and Solomon but it's rather short-lived and the the Israelites they're in that middle land between the powers of Mesopotamia and the power of Egypt never managed to hold on to empire very long and the only empire they can really hold on to is the subjugation of their neighbors David manages unlike Saul to subdue the Philistines but then manages to suppress the Ammonites and the Edomites and the other surrounding peoples and and Araman to have them pay David tribute and what happens after the breakup of the Israelite empire is that they're constantly having to deal with the the other people groups around them who again if you read the the book of the book of Genesis these are their cousins okay and so there's it's very much even the the imperial thing is has has blood ties and you'll notice that Abraham himself is a wandering Aramean he comes from the north Hagar comes from Egypt and and you always see these going back and forth with Egypt and of course the Israelites are slit go into Egypt for refuge from the famine they become slaves in Egypt you have all of these narratives within the family as such and the book of Genesis basically maps out the nations of the world to sort of get the familial connections between them but now empires come around and what empires do is they are genocidal in a sense they destroy nations and another big aspect of this imperial change comes with respect to religion when Jerusalem is destroyed and the temple is destroyed and the book of Ezekiel is a very important book in this transition because here the whole idea of who God is changes but now pay attention to what empires are empires bind people together with religion now again I've been reading a lot of Tom Holland lately and I'd very much recommend his books they're they're fun reads there's tons of history in them but you know the Roman Empire you can pretty much practice whatever private religion you want but your city had better have a shrine to Caesar and again reading dynasty Julius Caesar you know wants to he his family lines aren't really that great in terms of you know Roman dynasties and so you know you add these stories of of the Phoenicians and and you know the stuff that Virgil would would pull into you know would would very much pull out in the Aeneid and so you have this whole backstory and again what you use is this narrative to establish your credentials and you see that throughout the Roman period and it's this narrative and and by way of the religion of the empire you too can participate in this narrative this is what religion is doing all throughout it but but these empires are are by no means enlightenment empires it's not about the consent of the governed you are conquered and when you are conquered it is demonstrated that you are a a you are an insufficient people you are an inferior people you are a second class people and the conquest of the nations that have taken you over their supremacy the approval of the gods is demonstrated by their conquest over you that is the way the classical world worked and and that is why the Hebrew prophets when you get to Ezekiel they're so exceptional because they're you can just see in the book of Ezekiel they're working through all of these issues about well what does it mean to that that our nation that the temple of the lord was was first well it was corrupted by us first and then the lord had it destroyed and you notice how this is all processed and narrative again go back to Jordan Peterson's biblical series because narrative is the machine code the images and the stories by which we process all of this stuff and then you see all of that stuff going on in the the Hebrew scriptures and and empires are not about you know equal equal persons making contracts with each other empires are about demonstrating the Darwinian hierarchies of those who are closest to the gods and those who have inferior gods and simply were born to serve there's no such egalitarian in the egalitarianism in the ancient work but but lest we talk too badly about empires we should notice that well empires have actually been tremendously successful in our time imperialists ranked second only to fascist now this is going to be important for later on in the video in the in the lexicon of political swear words the contemporary critique of empires commonly takes two forms empires do not work in the long run it is not i'm sorry this is the critique empires do not work in the long run we say it is not possible to rule effectively over a large number of conquered peoples now there's a reason we tell this in america because what the united states has managed to do in the 20th century is establish a different kind of empire not dissimilar to let's say what the my wife forgot her phone charger hang on i have to she's going camping this weekend okay for so the second rule is even if it can be done it should not be done hmm morality why shouldn't it be done the assyrians bragged about their prowess and war the as we'll hear later the the triumphs of the romans dragged slaves through the empire parading the plunder that they took romans didn't pay taxes roman armies went out and and plundered the world to pay for rome where's this should come from even if it cannot if even it can be done it should not be done because empires are evil engines of destruction and exploitation well somebody might have been reading daniel seven and the dreams daniel is having and these these empires that consume the world and and grind it with iron teeth this comes right out of daniel seven that dreaded scary old testament every per every people have a right to self-determination well where did this idea come from and and should never be subject to the rule of another it's not a very imperial idea from a historic perspective the first statement is plain nonsense and the second is deeply problematic are we getting beyond our our christian roots now uval harari the truth is that empire has been the world's most common form of political or cultural change and the second is that the political organization for 2500 years most humans during these two and a half millennia have lived in empires empires also a very stable form of government iraq was very stable under saddam hussein not really an empire though but kind of a small one most empires have found it alarmingly easy to put down rebellions in general they have been toppled only by external invasion or by a split within the ruling elite conversely conquered peoples don't have a very good track record of freeing themselves from their imperial overlords most have remained subjugated for hundreds of years typically they have been slowly digested by the conquering empire until their distinct cultures fizzled out empires eat cultures empires are genocidal do you have a moral problem with that now well before we get to we'll keep going with these two now in the declaration of independence that was made crystal clear that to pursue life liberty and pursuit of happiness governments are formed with the consent of the governed to allow people to to flourish to prosper nothing in the declaration said anything about the european the white the protestant being christian it was really a social contract set up from first principles which of course there's some pretty big problems with of course the the african citizens it took quite a while to work that out and there were tensions in the and all men are created equal there's a fair amount packed into what you know who actually was an actor on that stage 20th century with ways of immigration from ireland from eastern europe and and they were also revolting against the empire of england and and so there's there's there's a fair amount going on in there and and yes it's contractual but but where do these get these they get these ideas that not only do people groups which are in some ways principalities have identities you know children israel well what's their father's name their father's name is israel renamed from jacob but individuals within it now we're gone fractal here we're scaling down individuals within it all have their own ideas of self-determination you know think of a rule here and some emergent ideas is get out of jail free card jews from italians and there were of course tensions between the the italians and the irish but by the standards of human history they got worked out pretty well i think we should remember too that we're talking very recent history here we're talking 19th and 20th centuries this is all quite new capitalizing on a feature of our psychology which is that even though we do have an in-group favoritism we do have tribalism what counts as a tribe is pretty elastic it is not by skin color we form coalitions that cut across skin color and a successful country is one that capitalizes on that elasticity form a virtual tribe which is simply every citizen of the country and that all now wait a minute so i i agree here but there's an elasticity here but what exactly is the mechanism for that now now sometimes it's contractual but the contractual mechanisms tend to be fairly short-lived dependent upon the nature of the moment the longer term ones that that create the elasticity are again i will assert narrative that that we find ourselves in this common ancestor and so julius caesar tries to promote himself by by you know creating a cult of himself and then when he dies his son who wants to consolidate his power his his adopted son augustus who wants to consolidate his power well what does he do with his father my father was a god well what does that make you the son of a god and again if we listen to some tom holland you'll notice that all of this language this gets built into christianity but now what happens in the apostle paul in christianity is that you can you don't have to be a jew you don't even have to be circumcised but you can become a son of god a son of god you can become a slave can become a son of god how well by being incorporated into christ and if you read the apostle paul what you see is that everything is in christ that is i would assert a kind of corporate it's not nationalism because it's not really a nation in the framework that we have but but it really becomes a corporate structure you are incorporated into christ slave and free jew and gentile male and female the book of galatians you're incorporated into christ now what pinker is arguing here very much comes from the apostle paul not julius caesar not the greeks the apostle paul ultimately every citizen in larger units including the humanity including all the world a lot of this depends well on undermining certain features of human nature such as in solidarity who who undermined kin solidarity who said in the gospels in a very dramatic way unless you hate your brother or sister you can have no part of me did jesus undermine kin solidarity did paul pick up on this it's been noted that in cultures that have a lot of cousin marriage where you're related to people in your clan it's rather hard to do nation building there like in like in iraq so maybe if they listen to jesus they could understand paul see part of the problem with pinker and many like him they don't know their bible enough and so they don't know where this stuff comes from people don't have a sense of superordinate loyalty to a coalition above their blood relatives and they are tightly tied to blood relatives by a cousin marriage but this also played itself out in the history of the united states and there's a wonderful look snatch of dialogue at the end of the first godfather movie when michael corleone enlists after pearl harbor and his brother sonny says what did you go to college to get stupid your country ain't your blood you're going to die out you're going to be a sap who dies for strangers and that is up you're going to be a sap who dies for strangers is there a story like that is there a is there a figure a principal ahead of something who is a sap who dies for strangers no there's no christianity here there's there's no there's no christianity here this is all christianity and and and why would you not pinker basically says it right here perfect uh encapsulation of the difference between traditional tribalism uh and the mentality that we need for a successful right well let's hear that again so so uh encapsulation of the different you country ain't your blood you're going to die out you're going to be a sap who dies for strangers and that is a perfect uh encapsulation of the difference between traditional tribalism uh and the mentality that we need for successful the mentality that we need for successful it's it's who be like that sap who dies for strangers that's exactly the mentality that we need for success where have i heard this before who where who was the who was the world's most famous sap who died for strangers while we were yet sinners christ died for us who said that who said that it was the apostle paul that said that right well so it sounds like it's you know it sounds like one of the ways to combat right wing identitarianism that the new emergence of right wing identitarianism is to make that conceptual distinction between national identity that's predicated on blood and soil let's say kinship direct kinship or or even secondary kinship and these these more abstract conceptions now it seems to me so just don't just you may know this or you may not but um ben shapiro's new book is number one on the new york times bestseller list and i read ben's book a while back and i think it shares some features with your book and it shares some features with my book and i would say the features it shares with my book is that i stress the importance of the judaic christian stories as part of that conceptual substructure that unites a civilization and then it has features in common with your book because it's also a pro enlightenment manifesto celebrating the achievements let's say of the greeks and the rationalists moving forward from there like shapiro sees our culture as and this is something that i agree with i would say as a marriage between that judaic christian tradition and that emergent enlightenment you're but what's funny is that even peterson and shapiro almost seem to be putting distance between judaic christian as they like to say and the enlightenment when it's completely embedded within christianity it's not like the enlightenment happened at some fringe of the of the fragmenting christendom the enlightenment was in some ways an attempt to shore up the fragmentation that had happened as a result of the protestant reformation in some ways the enlightenment was an attempt to create a new christendom without christ that's what the enlightenment is now we're going to get into that quite a bit more deeply but what's interesting is well we'll see what pinker wants to do with this here and stop me if i'm wrong but you're no you're right it's the other guy who's wrong emphasis so let's say that we're playing this abstract conceptual game that unites us as a people independent of our ethnicity and our race and it's a narrative game and there are principles that constitute the game rules for that agreement and you see those as primarily deriving from the enlightenment and and starting then well not i mean there's nothing new under the sun and certainly some enlightenment ideas had precursors in the in the the renaissance in ancient greece but that set of ideas that came together then it needed of course further elaboration i think that that's much more of a basis of human progress than the judaic christian tradition so so it's different from the judaic christian see see this is where it really falls apart because how on earth you very much see what you how you should see the enlightenment is an attempt at reforming the judaic christian ideas not departing but but trying to trying to replace trying to establish new institutions of unity after the the fragmentation of the church this this church this church this church state bond because you don't really have states so after the protestant reformation that's what the enlightenment is doing and again in my earlier videos i ran through this repeatedly that that so part of what you have in the time of the reformation in the renaissance is this turn to texts so if you were a renaissance scholar and you wanted to study physics you studied aristotle and and if you wanted to know you know you studied the bible so you have erasmus and luther and and it's all this turn towards the text and of course luther believes that now i've talked before also about this change this christianity becomes very psychological we have a we have a a further evolutionary move on the barfieldian scale with luther but but but what's happening is luther believes that the text plus reason will yield unanimity and out of that the church will flow but luther is disappointed and discouraged because even karlstad who's who's right there with him even he and karlstad can't agree and so what we have from luther is this fragmentation and and the this fragmentation happens basically because the the german princes will no longer enforce the totalitarian theological regime that the church had maintained unity in europe under luther is not killed like john hus and that that is again read fatal discord a terrific book about luther and erasmus which lays out so much of this history and i've talked about it in previous podcasts so so the german princes no longer are willing to enforce the edicts of the church and and all kinds of things are coming up mercantile class of the the printing press and luther is this this rock star in terms of who people want to read and he he begins to outshine even erasmus is who is a loyal son of the church but erasmus who is a a renaissance father this whole movement so so this keeps developing and by the time we get to the enlightenment fathers they're saying luther's attempt at unifying europe with reason and scripture doesn't work so let's get rid of scripture let's keep reason and let's add empiricism and reason together so instead of having catholic and protestant feuding we're now adding to it empiricist versus rationalist feuding and that's what happens in the story of europe and the the enlightenment are trying to just as luther was trying to to to see if we can have a unified foundation upon which we can build a civilization and and now they didn't get rid of scripture but you know as you can notice they there's a constant migracious of migration of what scripture is for that continues to move through that but it's not a departure from christianity it's really an attempt at continuing a progression within christianity so just try and keep this as some sort of um clean room without christianity isn't going to work now don't forget what i just read about empire how unity throughout the world had basically always been maintained usually through brute force and that was crucifixion this is how you maintained unity in this world through empire now they're looking for in the enlightenment new ways to do this because europe is fragmented and bloody again any every every intellectual movement draws from pre-existing ideas and so there was some cherry picking from from the judaeo christian tradition cherry picking cherry picking now now let's see how far we are with this okay we'll we'll keep going but uh it certainly did not depend on belief in jesus christ our savior it did not depend on a one god as opposed to many gods really depended on human well-being life liberty and the pursuit of happiness that's something you can believe in regardless of your theological events okay here we go so okay so yes and let's let's let's give pinker his due and and understand that a a secularism begins to to go out and we're going to in a sense demote christian what we identify as religious practice and say well that isn't it what now now notice life liberty in the pursuit of happiness these things are self-evident well let's let's have them talk a little bit more and let's a little think about this self-evident thing a little bit more so what what do you think so here here's the um question i have about that is that like it seemed to me so that the the the people who formulated the declaration of independence for example accepted as self-evident that human beings were intrinsically valuable and the locus of sovereignty insofar as they were the citizens who would determine the course of the nation and there's some recognition there as far as i'm concerned of intrinsic value outside of a rational argument you know it as a as a as an a priori presupposition we accept these truths as self-evident right and and and the the most fundamental truth of that is that it's something like in my view it's something like the strange metaphysical equivalence of man before god the fact that we all have intrinsic value and that's where i see the enlightenment being irreducibly embedded inside this underlying structure and that's that's different underlying narrative structure again if you go back to you know jordan peterson's biblical series you can see well what do you mean embedded what do you mean embedded in an underlying structure and what form does that take it takes a narrative form that because that's that's our machine code that's how we process this stuff then the idea of progress which is something that that you're focusing on and that i think is more attributable to the development let's say of science and technology ah now we're gonna when we get into tom holland we're gonna get into this too because progress tom holland is going to argue for an islamic state their their law is given it's dictated to by god for the mosaic code it's dictated to by god christianity is northrup fry notes and again peterson is a real student of northrup fry christianity is a religion that is worked out in translation but it still seems to me that the enlightenment had to have an under structure that enabled it to emerge for those self-evident truths to be accepted universally as self-evident right there right there and so under it still seems the development let's say of science and technology but it still seems to me that the enlightenment had to have an under structure that enabled it to emerge for those self-evident truths to be accepted universally as self-evident and well except i agree that there that those aren't scientific ideas and this is these are the set of ideas that i would draw together under the rubric of humanism it's not clear that humanism well where does this come from does does humanism come from the greeks does humanism come from the romans that the self-evident right to life liberty the pursuit of happiness is particularly judeo-christian i think i don't think you could find that in in fact in the you don't think you can find that in the scripture actually the first video that i made of this i had a lot of bible in it i just basically went through the bible and and what you see again and again is this movement towards treating this this exactly what he said earlier in the video needed to happen this decoupling of people from people from bloodlines into this this this multi-ethnic diverse group that now has been brought into a new family via the blood of christ that is the story of the new testament he says he can't find it in scripture maybe he needs to open scripture and read it maybe maybe he like the ethiopian eunuch should i'll come into your chariot steven and we'll walk through it because it's all there and in fact you don't need me to demonstrate it to you from scripture you can have a historian tell you about it so what one of the one of the points i want to make about this though is first of all this whole business about self-evident what is self-evident now now peterson just nails this right here because self-evident means i just see it well here's the difficulty why didn't we just see it until a few hundred years ago or even a couple hundred years ago or in some cases 50 or 75 years ago to me that is not self-evident that is the product of a very long historical process that leads us to see things in a new light these ideas of well let me tell you about self-evident as being a as being let's see what do i have next year okay let me tell you about self-evident well you know what it was very self-evident to have slaves and this goes all the way up to and including george washington and thomas jefferson why is it self-evident to have slaves well in the roman empire you have slaves because slaves make your life go better and and you can even find in the new testament jesus understood slaves he tells us one parable when you know if your slave has been working in the field all day and and comes into the house after he's tired and working in the field all day and the master says uh make me some dinner the slave doesn't say you know i've been working in that field all day and you've been sitting inside the house all day and now you're gonna have me make you make dinner there's nothing fair about that well you know what self-evident if you're the master is beat the slave and get him in the kitchen to make dinner that's what being a slave was there's nothing there's nothing not self-evident about slavery well not maybe now well we just see slavery is wrong but they didn't see it as wrong we can't figure that out we can't figure out that i hear atheists make it make this argument all the time a soci of sociology of knowledge argument well if you were born in iraq then you would be muslim yeah well if you were born in the 18th century you wouldn't have a problem with you wouldn't have a problem with slavery who had a problem with slavery in the 18th century mostly really really religious people well why would that be that's because they're reading the bible all the time well what are they picking up out of that bible isn't there slavery in the bible yeah there is but there's also some undertones and some undercurrents going on and you might read that little book in the new testament called philemon where the apostle paul where a runaway slave runs into the apostle paul and if you read roman law about runaway slaves well the roman law was pretty serious about runaway slaves and and the apostle paul says to onesimus says onesimus you know what you're slave philemon he's with me i'm gonna make sure i get those two guys straight um and he's a christian so now you might be his master but he's your brother and you're gonna have to think about what that means i could order you paul says but i won't because that's not how we christians relate to one another but i want you to treat him as a brother because he's your brother and he's my brother well what about undoing this blood stuff that you can't find in the bible it's all throughout the new testament that in fact in many ways it's one of the dominant themes of the new testament this dealing with blood the overcoming of the jew gentile thing it's in the book of acts it's in paul's letters over and over and over again but stephen peter can't find it he can't find it because he doesn't know how to read the new testament but it's all over the place now self-evident it's abundantly self-evident to the greeks and the romans that all men are not created equal because some are beautiful and some are and some are not and some women are beautiful and some are not and some people are born to power and some are not and it took hundreds and hundreds of years to get these ideas of biological status and hierarchy and they're very scientific because you know what i bet you lebron james kids are going to be great at basketball i don't know how i might know this but colby brian well his father played in the nba how many how many people in the in the nfl had fathers who played in the nfl you know this is biology boys and girls where do we get those ideas they're not scientific that all of us should be treated equally that comes from the story verse that comes from the narrative it doesn't come from science it doesn't come from genetics it comes from some place else now cherry picking no don't start with me cherry picking how do you know what a cherry is and how to distinguish it from other berries that might taste sweet in the moment but perhaps will cause you trouble a few hundred years down the line tobacco sugar even the agricultural revolution now my answer to stephen pinker is tom holland because tom holland is writing this book dominion and interviews are coming out and this book is will be coming out at the end of the month in the united states just five more days i'm gonna buy it on the first day you know kindle bang it's gonna be it's gonna be there an audible i'm gonna i'm gonna read that sucker i'm probably gonna buy it twice i'm gonna buy it in print and kindle probably but the morality that stephen pinker brings to his critique of christianity is the christian standard and you see this again again peter pinker pinkerton wants to say this is the kind of thinking we need well where did that thinking come from it comes from the new testament that's where it comes from now now tom holland didn't set out to do this he tells a story here he wrote a book about islam and some islamic critics says hey you know you're digging around in the the roots of our story dig into your own story now in one of the other videos tom tom holland as a six-year-old went to sunday school and someone gave him a bible there's adam and eve and a dinosaur and being a smart six-year-old he said dinosaurs didn't live with people what's with this sunday school teacher and the sunday school teacher you know didn't know how to answer and tom holland figured out right away i'm smarter than my sunday school teacher all this this whole church thing this must be a this there's nothing here for me and he went on to live his secular life until he wrote a book on islam spent a little bit of time in iraq studying the the persecution of a people by the islamic state and he starts having some experiences and that sends him back to the library and he starts well he's an expert in classical history what does he find well what i would say is is that by and large when christianity is put in the dock and condemned for being patriarchal or hegemonic or oppressive or spanish opposition or crusades or whatever i mean i'm sure you will be familiar with the brit backs get frightened that um the standards by which they the church is being judged and found wanting are themselves deep to christian and this of course is most famously pointed out by nicha who is a very significant presence in this book because actually i i read an enormous amount of christian literature for this book but almost nothing i read made me feel more deeply christian than nicha because nicha actually hates christianity for um for the reasons that by and large um you know even even a dorkens is willing to admire to admire it i mean namely you know it's it's valorization of the weak and the poor and that's what nicha hates and it looking at it through that prism then nicha was was was a brilliant classicist enables you to kind of switch gears and and and re-inhabit a world in which christianity does not exist and in which the image of the cross as an emblem of of redemption does not exist instead the cross remains what it was the romans and implemented torture yes that is quite a binary way of looking at it and that would be kind of my um instinct to read nicha in that way um we don't want to follow nicha therefore it's it's either the abyss or it's christian crucified but what what if someone would say to you okay we don't go with nicha but there's a third option isn't there we don't we don't need to go for the pale gallilean either well that is the course that that by and large the west has taken i mean it has taken the course of saying um you know we'll we'll take over christian morals and ethics thank you very much but we're not actually going to bother with any of the mumbo jumbo that requires us to go to church um that in many ways was the move that happens in the enlightenment and those of us who have stopped going to church that's the path we've taken the question that is posed by that of course is whether you can continue to have the bloom if the roots have been pulled up and we don't know the answer to that as a society yeah but we are i mean you know i think the secular west is very much a via media um it is a third way but reading nicha and thinking to yourself i don't want to go there did make the way of the cross more attractive to you because that does seem like quite a binary me that does you know it's well it's it's not nicha that that brought that home to me it's it's thinking about it's thinking about rome really uh i mean it's it's you know as a child i idolized julius either um and one of the reasons i idolized him was that he was not only a great man in almost every way it's possible to be great but he was renowned for his clementia his his qualities of mercy and compassion and yet when you when you write about him and you're that much older and you realize that caesar's renown depends on his feats of conquest in gall when it's said by plutah probably with some exaggeration but not a huge amount that he killed a million people and he enslaved another million people um and when he celebrates his triumph chains of these slaves are being dragged through the streets and placards are carried boasting how many people he's killed you realize this now now pay attention i was again listening to hardcore history and he made the note that even the nazis and the japanese and the second world war went to some pains to hide their atrocities and and and so what happens hardcore history and is is his element on the first world war noted that part of what part of what lost the germans the first world war was the rape of belgium and if that they had gone into belgium and you know sort tried to mollify the belgians and yeah we're gonna blow up your forts and we're gonna come through but you know we're gonna we're gonna treat you okay it was the you know it was the rape of belgium that got britain into the first world war in a big way and the germans tried to hide the atrocities of of killing the jews and the slavs and and the others and the japanese sort of tried to hide these things that's very unlike the assyrians now when we get a little bit deeper into the nazis in the next clips that i'm going to show with more tom holland you're going to note that there's something very important going on in the nazis and i just picked up timothy snider's book on on nazism because i i read his book bloodlands which is a which is a tough book to get through just because it's so brutal what the people of ukraine and belarus and poland suffered in the in the 30s and 40s but you know there's stuff going on here that we have to pay attention to so back to pack holland and again thanks to glenn scrivener glenn and i have done a couple of conversations and this this uh good good job on this glenn this this video doesn't have enough views so i'm just going to play a little part of it but but by all means watch the whole thing this is a profoundly alien world and the fact that it's founded on the systematic assumption that um those who are inferior must be downtrodden and it's right and proper to downtread them for which the cross is the ultimate emblem because the the cross is designed not just to torture but to humiliate and through the process of torture and humiliation to advertise rome's power and therefore to um to insinuate into the guts of those who who are subject to rome this kind of gnawing worm of of dread and while i was writing this i went to iraq and made a film about the islamic state and specifically what they were doing to the ezedes and we went to a town where lots of these eedies had lived um the women had been rounded up and enslaved and those who were not attractive enough to be enslaved had been shot and this happened on a kind of open field between sinjar the town that had just been liberated and the islamic state whose positions were about a mile or so further beyond the town and the men had been killed and many of them had been crucified in this town so i was wandering around a town that had had exactly the kind of fate that the romans had visited on on on town's lanae conflict and where people had been crucified and these people who've done the crucifixion were you know a mile away within striking distance and i can tell you that i felt that dread in my guts right um and it opened a kind of abyss to me and the abyss was contemplating a world where the cross had not come to take on the significance that it has in the present world even for those who are not christian but you know it you could be an atheist to be whatever but you look at say the red cross and it doesn't say torture it doesn't say dread it doesn't say terror doesn't say imperial power it says you know nice people doing nice things for people so even in that kind of attenuated level the cross has become a symbol of hope but to imagine a world where ruled by people for whom it did not have that significance to imagine a world in which the cross existed to to to torture and intimidate its enemies i did experience it as a kind of blasphemy and i did i'm sure that as a kind of religious faith because it was it was a response that that came from deep within me yes now again watch the watch the whole video the morality stephen pinker brings to his critique of christianity is the christian standard but pinker either doesn't know it or doesn't want to admit it or is in denial of it jesus morale jesus morality without the without the pale gallilean this is this via media that that tom holland is talking about now i want to pause this and i want to play more of tom holland in another podcast this is a podcast interview that he did i didn't know anything about this podcaster seems to be a conservative british podcaster um delingport but this is an hour-long podcast and i'm going to play a substantial portion of it but by all means watch the whole podcast because i'm just touching on some of the themes this podcast was at the end of it delingport tries to try or tell whatever his name is tries to say to tom holland you know is isn't this the best interview you're doing for your book and you know not to take any way from anything away from glenn's interview but this interview is outstanding just in terms of just so much of it so if you're going to watch uh you know i i told somebody on twitter i said i haven't i haven't been this excited about it one particular video since i started watching jordan jordan peterson's biblical series this this video is full of a number of things and so over the next little while don't be surprised to see me pull up clips of it as we go so i'm just gonna i'm just gonna play for you a sort of edited version of it where i focus on some of the items that relate to this video and but there's so much other gold in this conversation by all means watch it uh well i i i think that that um the argument of the book is that um christianity has so saturated everything that everybody in the west does that essentially it's the water inside the goldfish bowl in which we as goldfish are all swimming however that said i do think that um abruptly and so abruptly and and within our lifetimes there has been a kind of um precipitous drop in the number of people as you say who are familiar with the most basic biblical stories and so it may be that that we are now genuinely looking at the fading of that but even so even were no one to know anything about the bible or the history of christianity or anything the west would remain fundamentally shaped by that christian inheritance it would make no difference at all that's an astounding it's an astounding oops where have i gone i've uh oh oh here i am okay we'll see if windows plays well with this that's an astounding state statement he just made that that um but one of the historical stories and so it may be that that we are now genuinely looking at the fading of that but even so even were no one to know anything about the bible or the history of christianity or anything the west would remain fundamentally shaped by that christian inheritance it would make no difference at all okay it's interesting because in the other conversation he said well if you lose can you still have the bloom which is this moral framework if you lose the root and and i think what he's saying in this statement is that this has now been so deeply embedded into us that as you can see in stephen pinker as you can see in stephen woodford the rationality rules guy as you can see no i'm not obsessed with him is as you can see in matt dilahunty as you can see in sam harris as you can see in all of these celebrity atheists they all simply assume the fruit of christian morality that was not present in the ancient world at all and in fact it just simply isn't there now we can get it to c.s lewis's dow and that well there's some certainly some commonality in terms of this moral intuition but the framework by which we critique there's another interesting video of of from four years ago of tom holland debating with a woman in the uk about islam and the woman just keeps making the points about islam i go back to that renee gerard that renee gerard episode that i played a couple of times and maybe i'll i'll pull up that video and pull up the renee gerard video because she makes renee gerard's point because here are the westerners treating islamic peoples like christians would treat them and and and of course the islamic peoples they don't have those rules and holland's gonna say way more interesting stuff as we go through here but one of the one of the key figures in this kind of panoramic history is uh nicha frederick nicha the great german philosopher who in many ways is is the most scabrous critic of christianity and he's he's honest in his criticism in a way that lots of atheists today aren't celebrity atheists aren't because they may get they may they may say i don't believe in the christian god but it's manifesting almost everything that they they they say and do that they do believe in the kind of baggage of of christian morality and ethics that that that comes from that nicha hated he hated christian morals and he loathed christianity basically for having suppressed the sense of pagan virtue that you've just been eulogizing the sense of getting ready for war of you know fighting before the walls of troy that kind of glamorous savagery and cruelty that is manifest in so much um not just greek myth but but but pretty much all and in your brother's books no well well his brother writes history of more in the world war ii era tom holland's brother come to that in a minute but but all basically all the kind of the mythology and the epic of the ancient world and nicha says well what happens with jesus is that and is that christianity serves to make the victim the hero it serves to make those who are low it serves to make not the guy who nails that puts the nails into the cross but the guy who's having the nails driven through his his flesh and bone yeah he pinned to the ground he's the guy who becomes the center of attention and that he what nicha says is that the seismic understanding christianity is that weakness is a form of strength yeah because it can shame and humble and humiliate the strong and the powerful and nicha was pledged to the idea that this was this was wrong and that christianity was a kind of sickness now now this this capacity of christianity to do this again think about what that is that is a change in again well we might say the zeitgeist and and all of this stuff that jordan peterson talks about in terms of how we see things acted out and story and and how we play it out in drama all the stuff that he goes through again and again and again and in that first episode of the biblical series that that's all built into this and so what you see in jesus is this the beginning of this tremendous reversal and this takes hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of years to get built into us as you know through story and narrative and our imaginary and all of this stuff takes a long time to work through into us but this all starts with jesus and that the obsession with with the weak with the poor had to be overthrown and we had to get back to revalorizing strength and potency and indeed cruelty and the odd thing is is that that in the process of writing this book and researching so i i read an enormous amount and i read a lot of of christian apologetics people writing in defense of christianity arguing in favor of it but there was almost no one i read that made me personally feel more christian than nicha because the the depth of his contempt and hatred for everything that i actually most value in christianity is incredibly powerful and it kind of opens your eyes to what a world might be where where people don't actually don't hold to the uh the the values that christ the christianity has enshrined in our civilization and it's perfectly possible to imagine what um what that world might look like because essentially it would look quite like the greek world the rome world the world that existed before christianity and were that world to be fused with science and particularly with a kind of egenesis understanding of of darwinism yeah then we get something quite like nazism right quite like fascism and fascism essentially is an attempt both to go back to a pre-christian period so that's why mussellini initially is so fascinated with the figure of augustus the emperor who rules before jesus is born um and then hitler of course as well you know fascinated with the spartans with the romans with um the uh the blonde beasts in in nicha's words who'd inhabited the german forests um but of course he's also very keen to look forward to the future it's a very futurist project fascism and nazism in particular and and is invoking trends in science and technology that hitler sees as being beyond the christian era and it becomes the stated aim of hitler to destroy christianity utterly within a kind of 40-year program and anything that is left of of of the christian faith has to be subordinated and turned to what hitler casts as simultaneously the ancient and the modern program that he represents and so nazism is is is an attempt consciously to repudiate everything within european civilization that derives from from christianity and essentially that's pretty much everything right and i suppose life under the islamic state would be another example of the kind of well yes and no i mean it's complicated on the one hand while i was writing this book i made a film very bravely no james so you were so british it's just two homicidal maniacs that i've ever come to in my life oh james and it involved going to sinjar which is a city that the islamic state had captured where these edes your religious minority lived and islamic state regarded them as pagans and enslaved a lot of the women killed a lot of the ones that they didn't find attractive enough to enslave and crucified a lot of the men so i was in this the rubble of this town which had just been liberated a few weeks before and the islamic state were a mile or so beyond flat terrain you know so kind of within striking distance and being in this town and knowing that people had been crucified there yes suffered that death and that the people who had done that were within striking distance and to know that they were crucifying people in exactly the way that the romans had crucified people the aim was to intimidate to terrify to set up a sense of dread deep within the stomach so that that you as someone who has no way of fighting back against them is utterly intimidated by them utterly prostrate for them now remember what i read from uval harari about empire that is how empire functioned when the assyrians would conquer a city you'd go to the next city and say you know that other city that was stronger than you had a better army than you here's the head of their king now we'll make you a deal you can open the gates and let us have our way and maybe we'll go easy on you or you can try and fight us and we're going to kill and enslave you all and burn everything down and leave nothing left behind what sounds like the mob yeah that's how human beings are that's how we are and well what do american soldiers do when they go into iraq well you know they blew up your house they're gonna pay for it and you know i mean all of this stuff happens because something has changed in the in the imaginary underneath and we don't even know it and pinker doesn't know it and and harris doesn't know and none of the celebrity atheists seem to know this they all just assume well that's what morality is it's self-evident yeah it's self into evident to the we hold these things to be self-evident doesn't mean the ancient egyptians did or the assyrians or the romans or the greeks or anybody else and and and so the nazis are kind of like we're gonna overthrow this because well well why why would you want to overthrow this because we're strong we're the superior race we're gonna take this out oh really and and the japanese they have the same feelings i mean we all feel that we're the superior you know we're on top you know but why the care for the weak care for the weak is so costly care for the weak is is so sacrificial it makes no sense but somehow in us we feel yep that's well okay y'all we've been programmed this way well who changed our programming it's the sunday school answer jesus and it was the first time that i had had to contemplate the reality of crucifixion but also the reality of a world in which the concept of crucifixion is unmediated by the role that it plays in in christian civilization because the cross is probably the single most culturally recognizable symbol that that humanity has ever devised and so whenever you see it you are inclined to think of of the figure of jesus and you may not be a christian you may not believe a word of it you may be antithetical to christianity and yet the fact what the cross symbolizes is the triumph of the week over imperial power it's the triumph of um it's it's about finding victory in the heart of defeat and it's an incredibly powerful myth it's very you know it's the most symbolically potent myth that humanity has ever devised and to contemplate crucifixion as something that does not have that i found utterly terrifying and it kind of it made me realize that i i i take that so for granted that actually to to to to confront a world where that no longer exists is i found a kind of terrifying thing and it was a very strongly influential process end of writing this book the whole way through christianity's influence ultimately is not about whether you believe in god or or or what this bible verse says or what the church says you should or shouldn't do it's about ultimately the kind of the the the the the molten core of the faith the you know if you like that if you think of it as a kind of mighty power station generating waves of power the molten heart of that station is the is the myth of the of the of the cross and the resurrection and and a world without that i think would would be really terrifying now now some of you are going to jump on this and say oh yeah i agree with that that's wonderful but that doesn't mean i should practice anything well here's the thing you got the rider and the elephant and the rider on top says oh that molten core power surging out that sounds so good i'm i'm yeah you i want i want churches to go and i want i want i want traditional morality and i want all of this stuff yeah but what happens when what happens when someone crosses you because this molten core isn't just for well national politics or any of those things this the stuff has to scale down one of the interesting things that peterson said in in one of his that really struck me when i it was in maps of meaning i think or personality i don't remember which but but he said you know i think was maps of meaning he said you know in totalitarian systems the totalitarian thing has to go all the way down to the bottom you have to terrorize yourself and i've seen this happen in religious context as well that you have to you have to totalitarianize yourself in this it has to go all the way down but that's the same thing with this molten core these waves has to come all the way down with me and it depends about how do i treat my neighbor how does it change me well it's not going to change me because i listen to tom holland say oh this changes the world this is this ethic that we all look at and say yep even if churches go away we're going to keep this ethic well that's a wonderful thing but the ethic is going to wait go away because again go back to jordan peterson's first biblical series and well we organize this stuff because we see it played out and we watch it and we learn and so when this gunman goes in and he shoots up the the amish school children and the amish church puts a fund and he's shot by police and the aunt or he's killed himself i don't remember which but the amish the amish who had lost their daughters put together a collection so his children can go to college what is that and the nation looks at them and says oh we hate fundamentalists now the amish are fundamentalists by anybody's measure but why does their fundamentalism lead them to love their enemies and forgive those who hurt them hundreds of years of repeating and reinforcing and training those elephants so that you can turn the other cheek so that you can forgive and then right away even when i say those words we start to get what that's not practical that doesn't work in this world well now you've got some real dissonance going on and i don't think i've got it in this particular set of clips but but but holland will talk about that in this interview and again watch this whole interview because the whole thing is just outstanding and again i can't wait to get my hands on this book because holland is not you know later in this interview and i'm not going to play it later in this interview he talks about you know how he grew up and i talked about that a little bit before in the during the scrivener interview but he said oh we love those ideas that's so beautiful yeah but they're so painful and costly to live what will you mean well go back to pinker what you're going to be a sucker and die for strangers yeah that's what builds this morality and don't you for a minute imagine that if people stop dying for strangers will stop believing in this beautiful morality that we all look at and say yeah we all look at and say yeah that's right and both paul the saint paul who who who who is the first christian writer that we have he recognizes that the cross lines are the heart of the message that he's given and he recognizes that this is a scandal shock that it's almost impossible to understand and yet that's what he's preaching and then nicha at the kind of the end of the christian period likewise he also said this is the most shocking idea the most shocking symbol that humanity's ever come up with he hates it but he recognizes the form that is seismic civilizational transformation that it was able to generate and he hates and fears it because he recognizes its power so you spend a lot of your and and why how can you not recognize its power because i just did that video and add astra and the joker there's way more people out there living a joker reality than the brad pitt spaceman superhero reality you know are you beautiful do you keep your hair do you not age do you have lots of money do all your relationships go well no it doesn't happen i'm a pastor people come into church and say how these people have their lives all together say yeah you're not their pastor you don't know what their lives are like you don't know the problems that they have in their marriages you don't know how much debt they have you don't know how much they're drinking you don't know how much they're struggling just to get through life and these are all the people that seem to be making it i'm not even talking about the homeless people that sleep against my door humanity is a mess this isn't this stuff isn't just you know something we do for window dressing it's this is this is this is the world and so when when when paul says that that they're there's there's neither jew nor gentile slave nor free and and he says you go back you go back to your slave master you're like you're telling the slave to go back to the slave master yes and you're also telling the slave master that slave is your brother treat him accordingly i'm watching you do it i'm not going to order you but you were bought you're someone's slave treat him the way you'd like to be treated listen to freddy this is the gospel and when we hear this we get this vision we say yes i would like to imagine that myself i this little nobody who has all these problems i can be a child of god i can be a son of god not just augustus sitting in rome who you know well let's let's all put up temples for for julius caesar because he's god and yep augustin is gonna augustus is going not augustin augustus augustus is gonna give you money for that because augustus is promoting his father's his father's religion because he's a son of god and and along come the christians and it says to the slave to the girl that's picked up off the dirt pile you are a child of god well what do you mean by that god the very son of god came down philippians 2 and became a slave became a nothing for your sake he said that's a beautiful story pastor you just keep telling people yeah but the thing is if i just keep telling people it you don't it doesn't sink in we're elephants we have to be immersed in it which is exactly why there is a church and why we need community and why all this comes together and you say yeah but when i go to church i don't feel it yeah you feel it when you go to the gym what do you feel when you go to the gym you feel pain because if you work this out if you actually practice what jesus teaches you feel pain what happens when you turn the child the other cheek you most of the time get hit twice and and and you say well how does this work well you're not going to know until my friend my friend warrants i got it he wants me to write a review of his book and basically the heart of his book how good is the golden rule you won't know it until you try it and when you try it you'll say well this doesn't work because i thought this was supposed to bring you know rainbows and unicorns and perpetual daisies no but what it does is it makes you it makes you the kind of being that people stop and say i don't know if i want to be like him but i sure want to be like him history writing career in ancient times in pre-christian times um with a note temporary before christianity came along with a note tempering forces on human behavior and and now again we're democratic people and c.s lewis writes about this in his book miracles in his chapter the great miracle what democratic people we want to believe and we get this idea from christianity too and that's the thing with christianity there's all these ideas that's like how do we fit these things together isn't god equal distance from each of us yes but godliness isn't you know asking you receive knocking you will be answered well well aren't all religions starting from the same place really you believe that isn't nazism a religion well now what what what holland is about to say if you're secular should really blow your mind of course stopped everyone doing absolutely i mean christianity well christian christianity emerges from a kind of melting pot of different cultures and eusebius who is the bishop who writes the life of constantine in the early fourth century when he writes about he writes about why was jesus born when he was born and he said well he was born in the reign of augustus and augustus had just united the world so rome rules this vast empire for the first time people from you know the atlantic to near eastern joy and he doesn't rule them by the consent of the governed romans pay no taxes jews pay taxes for romans and everyone else that's how rome rules it's not by the consent in a single global order and he says well this is proof of god's providence because if this hadn't happened then the message of the gospel would not have been able to spread as easily he did i mean in a sense he's right i mean you don't have to invoke god's providence but it's clearly the fact it's clear that what the roman world facilitates is the mixing and mingling of different cultural traditions and those cultural traditions most obviously there's the tradition of of the hebrew scriptures of of jewish civilization which we shouldn't call judaism there is a there is a greek word eudaismos which is often translated as judaism but that's hugely anachronistic what it means is a jewishness so it relates to the the possible span of of of the ways that you can be jewish now remember in pinker's talk when pinker says well the bible the bible is just about you know god's chosen that's the bible's just just reinforcing bloodline ah but the bible the christian bible has two parts and there's a spectrum which this jewishness that tom holland is noting and and one side of it is going to is going to emerge through christianity and if you think again about what christianity is doing you'll be able to figure out which side and it's probably best to think of of jewishness as points on a bandwidth so at one end there is um the idea that this one god is the god of israel bound by covenant with one particular people and at the other he is the god who has created the heavens and the earths and therefore every human being on the face of the planet which one do you choose to emphasize and what becomes christianity emerges out of this by emphasizing the universal god what will become the kind of talmudic tradition the rabbinical tradition um is one that emphasizes god's role as the god of israel so so that's obviously the key kind of determinant but you also have other influences as well you have the influence of persia which is kind of refracted through the jewish traditions and the key thing about persian idea is this kind of notion of a dualistic world where um the entire universe is to be understood in moral terms that there are rival principles of darkness and light of um the line of truth um also there is the idea that there is a that that that there will be an end of days that there will be a day of judgment and all these kind of concepts so that you can behave well or yeah well it's it it it basically it moralizes almost everything you do so it it it kind of anything that you do anything in the world is is somehow part of a kind of moral dimension so that's very important people had a moral conscience before jesus well so the word conscience is it you know is a is a really interesting one it's a greek concept specifically a stoic concept and and before rome there is greece so there is alexander who conquers the near east and founds the great city of alexandria which is the city where most jews live far more than in jerusalem so jews become very very helenized in the way that that you know lots of jews now are anglicized um you know just as there are jews now who speak english but don't speak hebrew so likewise there were lots of jews who only speak greek but didn't speak hebrew one of the one of the philosophies which is very influential on christianity is stoicism and stoicism has this idea that um basically the divine is manifest within everything and therefore the whole world is a cosmopolitan in him we live and move and have our being a great kind of universal city um and therefore there is basically a kind of commonality everybody has a kind of shared identity and the spark of the divine that every human being has a the stoic call it synodasis and conscience is is effectively the closest translation we have of that and when paul comes to write his letters he's saying that the covenant that existed between the god of israel and the chosen people that this is no longer necessary because now with christ death on the cross a new covenant has been established which is binds everybody and the way that that becomes manifest is where you you you you discover the knowledge that christ has died for you in your heart and the law of god rather than being written on the tablets as it had been at mount sinai is now written on your heart and paul reaches for this word synodasis the stoic word for conscience and he says conscience is where the law of god is written and that's a seismically influential moment because it means that in christian civilization there is a concept that that of god's law but it's not written down in the way that it is in hebrew scripture and the way that it will be in islamic scripture instead it's written on the heart and so that means that your concept of what is right and wrong yeah can evolve over time moving forward if you look at the sixth and seventh centuries you have three massive bodies of law that emerges from that it's a kind of massively legal legally codifying age you have the talmud jewish body of law you have the sunna islamic body of law and then you have the great corpus of roman law now only one of those i mean the talmud and the sunna supposedly come directly from god so it's it's divinity is manifest with now this is where and you'll hear me talk about organic inspiration this is where these questions of of nature of inspiration comes so the jewish low code comes here's the mosaic law this is from god here's the islamic word this is from god now the new testament version is this is inspired by god this is from god but christians don't worship the bible the bible is not divine but the holy we father son and holy spirit not father son and holy scripture and and so what happens in christianity is you actually get this this progressive revelation now that's a really dicey thing to have and and you know people we don't like that and and so what it opens up are all of these continual conversations about is this within the canon is this not within the canon can you not lose your narrative thread without your religion this is this is radioactive stuff in a religion but this is within christianity and and so this is why i keep saying that the the western the culture war in the west is a christian civil war this is elements of christianity working through all of these difficult questions you say yeah but it's really troubling again read alistair mcgrath's book heresy because what he asserts in heresy is that the the establishment of orthodoxy is often a result of wrestling with heterodox ideas and you find which ideas become dead ends and it's through all of this diversity of ideas and conversation and confusion and struggle and many oftentimes in the history of the church bloodshed but out of this emerges truth so it's it's it's darwinian in a sense but but again this is according to christianity this is all guided by the holy spirit and and that's why we have fierce conversations within the church and we study the text so as not to lose this lose the thread and and what you see is communities whole communities they adopt a certain thread and they become a dead end but on it goes in it the body of roman law is secular the emperors who codify them are christian but it doesn't matter that the laws that they're codifying come from the the pagan roman past and that means that in christian civilization it's fine for laws that are authored by humans to offer a kind of idea that that this is an ultimate legal recourse that you do not get in jewish and and is right there and he's going to go into this quite a bit more deeply right there you see the beginning of the relationship with the secular well how can the words of man be the word of god well this is what you're working through i'm a civilization so that's a kind of fundamental aspect that derives from christianity and this idea of conscience this idea that god speaks to you lets you know what is true that the light of his truth irradiates you and hopefully the world beyond that also is a massively potent idea because it it feeds into the idea that human society can be progressive that you can get to know things better but the more the light of conscience shines and people keep debating well why did the enlightenment why did the scientific revolution why all of this dramatic improvement within christendom well you can begin to see that the foundation was laid very early on for all of this to happen no the enlightenment has nothing to do with christianity the enlightenment is built on christianity so the better you can become so the better your laws can become so the better your society can become and in in in latin christendom in the west by the 11th century this idea has been fused with the idea that that the whole of society can can be lit by the light of god that it can be born again that it can be kind of baptized in the water of the spirit and that then imports the idea that everything in society can be improved because essentially up until that point most people had an understanding of society with which i'm personally hugely sympathetic that that all change is bad yeah that um you know you shouldn't change anything yeah things are much better just leave it as it is in the 11th century that that idea is fundamentally radically and permanently changed in the west because the idea that you can make society better gets embedded in the fabric of of what will become that this kind of papal order that emerges and will become the civilization first of medieval christendom then with the reformation then with the french revolution now with the 60s in its aftermath the same impulses are reverberating out and out and out like the kind of ripples from a mighty earthquake now now that doesn't baptize all of the changes that happen because what what you have in fact is a structure a community of communities that work through these things and try them out and and in a very darwinian way some drop off they it is over time revealed that these are dead ends and so it's it's it's continuity it's dynamic there's there's progress in it now i'm i'm ah mill i'm not postmill and those of you who know this christian nomenclature will have an understanding of why i just said that but but all of this is going on and this is all set up again by christianity by well in the latter days the son of man came and revealed this to us so this idea that there is um evolution built into christianity is that why why uh we've got this situation where we well the concept of the secular you mentioned is it is it why islam is not capable of doing this because it hasn't got that inbuilt well um it's fixed islam christianity come from the same matrix so that's so you know if you're um say you were you were um i mean to a hindu for instance it's often said that that to hindu christianity and islam are merely kind of shoots off the same branch yeah obviously that's true but in the same way that you know there are profound and fundamental differences between the civilizations as they've grown up and um one of the one of the difficulties with recognizing that is again precisely the degree to which the christian notion of there being something called a religion has become universal wherever european languages are spoken and and often beyond that as well but the concept that there is something called a religion exists and people tend to assume that this is you know you might as well say you know that there are trees or there are dogs as their religions it seems to be as natural as that as that but it isn't the concept of religion again is a highly culturally distinctive notion that is bred of the marrow of christian assumptions and essentially it relates to what you were talking about about the concept of the secular which again is a wholly contingent culturally specific idea which no other civilization has has has really concept of the secular in islam and there wasn't a concept of the secular in christianity really until until the kind of early middle ages really and and up large and the people like that yes around that period um and it really it goes back to uh the time of augustin who is living when um rome in 410 is sacked and there are lots of of of romans who haven't become christian who say well this is because um we've abandoned the old ways we've abandoned the old gods so we're being punished and augustin says no not at all the divine cannot be manifest in in the earthly order only the radiant purity of heaven is eternal everything human everything mortal everything terrestrial is in a state of flux and he reaches for a latin word cyclum to define that and cyclum literally means the limit of the span of human memory so 80 years 100 years 120 years comes to be identified with 100 so hence cyclum feeds into you know czech french word century but and so the cycle in the world the dimension of the cycle in the city of man gets counterpointed to the city of god right and if you want to as a human who is trapped within the cyclum the flux of things if you want to get close to god before death then you need to bind yourself to him and again in latin that there is a word religio which in the classical period meant something that binds you to a god so it could be priesthood it could be a festival it could be a sacrifice in the christian period a religio comes to mean those who religiones are those who particularly bind themselves to god so monks nuns hermits people like that and over the course of the early middle ages and then into the high middle ages you get this idea that there's the dimension of religio and there's the dimension of the cyclum and this becomes institutionalized in the 11th century when when kind of radicals and in fact you could almost say heretics take they seize control of of the most prestigious bishopric in in christendom that of rome and out of this kind of papal order they found europe's first great revolutionary order which says that the dimension of of of the church of the sacred of the holy of religio has to be permanently and fundamentally separated from the dimension of the cyclum so kings who until an emperor's who until that point had had the perfect right to appoint bishops and themselves had all kinds of sacral power they get kind of shoved to one side and this basically there's a great project to drain the dimension of the cyclum of of things that had made it sacred and the effect of that is to kind of institutionalize this idea that there is a division between the dimension let's say of religio and the dimension of the cyclum and then in the reformation the protestant reformation religion everyone has a religion it's not just monks anymore you see this stuff going back and forth everyone has a religio and and so you start to get a new sense of of what becomes anglicized to become religion so religion has two shades of meaning on the one hand it's the personal relationship that you as a believer have with the divine you know what do you believe what do you think what's your relationship to a god this is what religion means to to a christian in the 17th 18th century and then against that it's something that can be defined against the secular so it's something that's kind of to one side so religion is something that is separate from you know society the economy music culture whatever yeah so you have secular music you have religious music and everyone starts to know what that means and so the idea that religion is something that can be parked on one side by the time that the british start for instance to take over india this is something that they're absolutely taking for granted and when they go abroad they get asked well what what is the religion you know what is the religion of people in the ottoman empire oh it's something called islam what's the origin of people in hindustan where the hindus live the indians live oh well it must be something called hinduism now for a lot of you listening you're thinking what's he talking about and and it's all about the the thing that this is the water that they're swimming in that there's no such thing as a religion there's just the way that you live and and what happens when you have a religion is you pull it apart from yourself there's some self-transcendence in there and once you make that move of self-transcendence well then you can start looking at it and then then you've got the engagement of the will and well well do i like this thing well then we have rationality well does this way work and and so you have the idea of the progressive and now we have the the self-transcendence from the religious and and you know once you begin to see this machinery all taking place well the the potential for remaking the world is just radical and again all of this comes about because of christianity and and we're not even up to the enlightenment but by the time we get to the enlightenment and you know at first again in the reformation during the renaissance i mean martin luther is is sort of the the he's sort of the transition period from the from the medieval to the modern and but but luther was still there's there's authority in the text and and when that text plus reason didn't seem to afford the uniformity and the and the peace which which luther had hoped it would have well well now let's look to empiricism so reason reason plus empiricism will will give us the uniformity but we're still in that process and so we hold these truths to be self-evident really doesn't seem to be self-evident to sally hemmings well who well how did she feel about her relationship with thomas and thomas jefferson and and what about thomas jefferson and clipping up his bible and on and on and on and on and on and on and on all of the foundations are there and we do it sort of mindlessly who knew we could pull ourselves away from a religion and so again i was talking to one of the members of my meetup and one of his parents is of japanese descent and he just looks at all these americans he kind of chuckles he says they think they're buddhists go to japan and find some real ones you can't be buddhist here well you can if you're in this seculum of christianity because well there's me in this via media this secular space and now i can be a consumer of religions and i'll choose my religion and maybe i'll i'll take the menu approach i'll choose a little bit of buddhism i'll choose a little christianity and and i'll define my own religion but then you're not really embedded in it then you're just placing it on i mean this this stuff gets endlessly complicated but again all of this comes by christianity that's where it comes from and to say well i'm not christian well yeah you can't even say that sentence apart from christianity and so christians construct this idea of there being world religions but christianity is of course the prototype so it's like the legend of procrustes the one that the thief the robber that theses kills in the legend who supposedly takes travelers and makes them sleep in his magical bed and it always fits them and the way that he makes the bed always fit his visitors is if they're too short he racks them and if they're too long he chops it off and that's essentially what you gotta love a you gotta love a classicist because he's got he's got all the you know i have the bible stories at my fingers but he's got the myths at his fingers and you know there's a myth for everything western society you know imperialism has done with the belief systems and the structures of belief of of other civilizations is that it's imposed this procrustian model of religion you know across the entire world and so to that extent hinduism islam judaism these are all concepts that have been christianized and if there's an indian scholar who said i think accurately brilliantly that christianization advances in two ways it advances through conversion obviously so but it also can proceeds through secularization in other words in in convincing societies that there is something called the secular and that there is something called religion that is separate from it and in that sense although the raj did not convert india to christianity on any mass scale it did convert it to secularism and when the when the raj ended and the british left now the raj it was the the british administration of india okay just i know that's a term that the british might know and americans might not but the raj is the british administration of india when india was its colony india was reestablished as a secular republic and to this day it remains a secular i like that and and think about after world war after world war one after the defeat of the ottoman turks i mean turkey becomes a secular society and you can see how this is so incredible how how well we're not going to take your christianity but the secular idea just transforms the world i was listening to a video of of the i was listening to a video of a guy who had very much added jordan peterson's story and i don't know maybe i'll use it on my channel as such but but you know this guy goes to china to teach english and he goes there as a christian missionary he wants to make christian converts and then he loses his faith but he goes to china he says it's the most secular country you could imagine and it's like well how did china get secular judaio christianity what marxism is part of the judaio christian stream isn't it and so via marx i mean the christian missionaries didn't succeed in converting people to christianity but marx and communism and mao converted it to this pseudo christian secularity which is also sort of christianity coming under the surface and they don't even know it we're not christians we're secular you're kind of christian light you're kind of protestant light it's the whole framework of thinking that has completely i mean you're hard pressed to find people in the world you can still find them but you're hard pressed to find people in the world that haven't been transformed by this this blew my mind when i heard this and i thought wow it's like lights went on that's part of what mode is about because moody and and and the kind of what's called hindu nationalism essentially it's it's a response to this it's a it's a recognition of the fact that the secular is not as western liberals and and liberals across the world like to think something that is just a natural state yeah it's not it's it's specific to a particular civilization that has important exported this idea around the world yeah and you know and same with japan japan is you know it's not at all christian country christianity was was brutally and highly effectively wiped out in japan in the 17th century but japan also is now secular right so uh now there was something oh oh yes environmentalism so i chopped this up a little bit just for because watch the whole video because i don't know you know i know glenn and i know he won't have any problem me using this video i'm using a lot of this video and i don't know how this guy's gonna feel about that so you know watch his video subscribe to his channel whatever you gotta do to thank him for for making this go ahead and thank him because this interview was just blew my mind i do think that that um oh now humanism because go back and remember what did what did pinker say none of this judaio christian stuff humanism well what is humanism there is a huge tension um between environmentalism and humanism and generally this generally they get conflated if you're a humanist then you're also likely to be an environmentalist humanism is clearly christian humanism is basically christianity Without Sorry, Steven Pinker. Sorry Sam Adams. It's basically Christianity without Christ. It's that via media that he's talked to Glenn Scrivener. That's humanism. That's what it is. Secular humanism. That's what it is. Because it's founded on the idea that humans are special. And that's a theological notion. And it goes back to the book of Genesis and the idea that God created man and woman in his image. And that affords an incredible dignity to humans. I mean, there's no other belief system that offers anything like that to humans. And it's not just, I mean, some people then jump in and say, well, you've got Buddhists and Hindus, they revere life. Yeah, they do. But there's a hierarchy here. And it's humans at the top of the hierarchy. The Bible reveres life. You have the end of the book of Jonah. You have the, you know, should God not be concerned about the people of Nineveh and many cows too? You know, God values those things. But humanity is at the top of the hierarchy. Humanism. It's right there in the word. And to say that humans have a special status, that you can have something called humanism, is clearly drawing on that, even if humanists don't necessarily want to acknowledge that. Against that, environmentalism is founded on the conviction that humans are bad for the planet and increasingly bad for the planet. And that we are poisoning it and we're wiping out vast numbers of species, have wiped out vast numbers of species, that there are too many of us, that we're spreading everywhere. And probably the best thing for the planet would be if we'd never existed. And that being said, perhaps we should all just, you know, wipe ourselves out. You summed it up pretty well. So there is clearly a tension there between the notion that humans are great and the kind of implicit idea that we're all a plague. And so the way that this is squared is to try and campaign for the reduction of human influence on the planet without facing up to the obvious way to reduce human influence on the planet, which is to wipe out humanity. Well some of them do. Some of them, you know, voluntary human extinction movement. And so it does. And so there is always the chance that environmentalism will fade into a kind of Nazi style or, you know, or pagan style, in which the idea that humans do have a special status is overturned. And in fact, nature, other species, they come to seem more important and humanity is cast as a kind of plague, which is powerfully and fundamentally opposite to the Christian perspective. But it's kind of testimony to the enduring hold of Christianity and its assumptions on people who live in the West, that there's not much uptake for that. I mean, clearly there are people on the fringes of the Green movement who do think that, but they are seen as problematic. It would delight me, Tom, given what you said earlier, to know, if you don't know already, that the Nazis were fanatically green. A lot of the idea. Absolutely. Yes, they were. And they were able to be, you know, their distinctive form of green was a very pagan and post-human one, post-humanist one. Yeah. Because of course, the Nazis absolutely, at the heart of their philosophy, their sense of what was good was a conscious repudiation of the two great moral fundamentals of Christianity. One that all human beings created in the image of God, that they're all, you know, there's a fundamental equality among humans. Nazis say no, not at all. Actually, there is Greek and Jew. And the Jews are a lower form and we should have no compunction about getting rid of them. Because their other thing that they reject is the idea that the weak have, or the oppressed or the tortured, have any claim on the strong. And they say, no, the strong should do what they like. And so in a sense, I think that's what's enabled Christian morals and values to endure as effectively even though the habit of Christian worship and faith has faded. Because the West is haunted by a kind of subliminal understanding of what happens when Christianity goes. Because we've seen it with the Nazis. We know what happens when you get rid of the idea that all humans are created in the image of God. And we know what happens when you get rid of the idea that the weak have a kind of, have rights. Now what's interesting here is that, you know, if you look at 20th century history, it's fascinating because in certain elements after Darwin very much went into social Darwinism. And again, the Scopes Trial in Dayton, Tennessee with William Jennings Bryan was actually all about this. And this was Bryan's point that he saw this movement going and he wanted to stop it. Now he wanted to stop it by attacking the scientific underpinnings of it. But this is the battle that was fought. And it didn't really end. Read documents from the, you know, broadly speaking, eugenics in the 20s and 30s. It wasn't until Nazism that suddenly everybody starts kind of putting that stuff away. And this again goes to Alastair McGrath's idea that we work this stuff out in time. And then when we see it fully in front of us, we're like, oh no, we don't want to go there. But the problem is for, for, well, how should, so a society sees this and so you've got, you know, obviously Jewish communities after the Holocaust. Never forget. Well, what do you mean never forget? We have to institutionalize this. We have to create, in a sense, a holy book. We have to create sacredness so that we don't repeat these things. This is the process by which we're doing this stuff. And the difficulty that we're having right now is that we're, you know, as C.S. Lewis often says, we're cutting off the branch that we're sitting on in terms of, well, what's at the root of this? Well, the stresses we're seeing is like we're floating away from this. But we think that we're all riders and not elephants. Well, what do the elephants need? The elephants need to be working on this stuff all the time and living it out in their normal life and living it out and as they're growing up. And I mean, this all gets built into a society. It's not just these lovely ideas that we have on top. I was watching someone had posted on Twitter this thing from LeBron James where he has some children and they're just chanting note of violence. And I thought I was looking at some evangelical Sunday school classroom because, and what I know is that that doesn't work. Just tell them, well, here's the goal. Oh yeah. We all gain moral status by talking about this goal. Yeah, but when things get rough, you revert back to what has been reinforced in you from the beginning. So then you say, okay, here's your goal. How can you reinforce that is you're going to have to build it up every week. You have to build it up in your mind and in your heart. It's going to have to be part of you. It's going to be your formation. It's going to be something that you sacrifice for. And if it doesn't get in at that level, it'll never stand the trial that will come upon you. Which they can claim against the strong because we've seen it in the form of Nazism. So what's happened is that, um. And what he's about to say here is just brilliant. I've heard him say it a few times and it took me a few times to get my mind around it. And I thought, oh, that's exactly right. We no longer need the devil because we have Hitler and we no longer need hell because we have Auschwitz and we no longer need heretics because we have Nazis. And I think that that explains the readiness of people who are essentially promoting Christian values and assumptions without Christian belief to level the charge of Nazi. It's almost anyone who disagrees with them. That's very interesting. And I think. And you see, so what happens here in these and part of my criticism of woke religion has been, well, you're taking the values, but you're ignoring the method. Well, and this is where I get into some fights with anti-racists because I say, look at the method of Dr. King. It was you love, you love your enemies into submission. It sounds manipulative, but you love your enemies into submission, even though you might die in the process. Where would someone get an idea like that? Jesus, you love your enemies. You just keep loving them even when they kill you. Well, who would say such a thing? That'll never work. And yeah, why you wind up dead? Well, that's exactly right. And that's why the Christian story is as it is. And the disciples fully understood what crucifixion meant and they fully understood its terror. And so they quivered in a hidden room in Jerusalem while only the women and children would watch Jesus crucified. And then he rose from the dead. And then you read in the book of Acts, the religious authorities who had participated in the killing of Jesus see his disciples and they say, why are they so bold? They're so bold because they've already seen how this plays out. They were resurrected. You say, yeah, but you know, they killed Peter and Paul and they didn't rise from the dead. And Christians say, just you wait. What do you mean wait? It's been 2000 years. Yeah, you might wait a while. And then if you're skeptical, you say, well, you know, yeah, you know, there's no resurrection. I don't believe Peter and Paul are going to rise, but I sure am glad somebody's doing it because I sure would rather live in a society where they value the weak because, you know, I might be strong between maybe I may be physically strong in my 20s. I might be socially strong in my 50s and 60s, but someday I'm going to be old. And right now in our society, we're old for a really long time. And what are you going to do when you're old? While you're old and worthless, you know, read the Romans, read how many people got knifed and poisoned and, you know, there was a coup and you topple them when you show this the first sign of weakness. That's how it works, right? Don't show weakness because once you show weakness, they'll be all over you. What happens in a society where weakness becomes valued and we care for the dispossessed and we care for the weak and we care for the minority and we even treat our enemies with love? Well, that's the world I want to live in. Yeah, but can you really live in that if you don't really believe that it's affordable? Well, what do you mean affordable? What I hear most often underneath people seldom say it directly is Christianity is irresponsible. Why should I pour out my life for people who are undeserving? Well, what's at the heart of Christianity? A man who poured out his life for a world that was undeserving. And again, we think I don't want to live that way, but I sure want my neighbor to. Well, read that meditation on Molech and Slate Star Codex, this little interesting story about a fishing people sharing a fishery and the scientist comes and says, well, this is what you have to do to take care of your fishery. And everybody takes care of it except one. And then when everybody sees that one person not taking care of the fishery, why should I bear the burden for my neighbor? What kind of sap are you to go out and die for a stranger? Right? Steven Pinker? Yeah, but this is exactly the thing we need, Steven Pinker says. Well, that's right, but it's not Christian. It's not Christian. What's that cross about? It's just silly. You're absolutely spot on as well. I mean, the use of Nazi and Hitler, everything being literally everything I don't like is Hitler has become such a trope of the last 20 years. But it's, and I think that it's coincided with the kind of ongoing retreat of confessional Christianity. But it kind of begs a question, which is, what if people turn around and say, yeah, and? What recourse then do you have to say, well, oh, you know, we should care for the weak or all human beings are equal? Because if you don't have the theological justification that's provided by Christian myth, by Christian theodicy, by the great inheritance of writings from the church, what recourse do you have to justify that? If someone turns around and says, well, actually, I'm a massive racist and I think we should kill the Jews. How do you beyond saying, well, you're a Nazi, and then they turn around and say, yeah, I'm a Nazi. What do you do? What recourse do you have? I'm you and I both spend time on Twitter. I probably get given a harder time than you because I'm more right. Yeah, right. Whatever. Yeah, I'm less emollient. I think it's, yeah, it would be hard to be. Yeah, less of a kind of Teresa. I'm just really nasty, personal, aggressive stuff full of hate. I'm surprised by how often when you look at the identity of the person tweeting it, they are a self professed Christian or a Quaker or a one of those those Buddhists, you know, the ones that do the kind of, you know, Buddhism, not my thing. No, no, but yeah, not that kind of real, but not the Oriental Buddhism, but the kind of the Japanese you want where they say whatever anyway. I'm just, it strikes me as odd the number of Christian self professed Christians out there who really don't understand the basic the basics of Christianity. Well, it goes back to the paradox of the heart of Christianity that you feel that you are right and so therefore you have the right to, you know, indeed, you know, Christ says go out and spread the gospel to corners of the world. Yeah. So you feel that, you know, you have to be evangelical about it. You have the good news and people who reject your good news, you have to try and either persuade them or kind of bully them into giving that up. But if you push the bullying too far, if you become too assertive, if you become too domineering, then you risk becoming, you know, you're not Christ, you're the Roman soldiers who have taken Christ out and nailing him to the cross. And that's always the risk. And the greatest, I suppose, the greatest fictional meditation on that is in the short story in Dostoevsky's Brothers Karamazov, the Grand Inquisitor, where Jesus comes back and the Grand Inquisitor, he's busy burning everyone, he arrests Jesus and he comes into his cell and says, I know you're Jesus, but I'm still going to burn you. So in other words, Christians not being Christians, Christians not, Christians not being Christians, being these, this, you know, sort of Christian, a little Christian, not enough Christian. And then when a real one comes along, everybody says, wow, that's amazing. I don't know if I want to be that, but I sure want that around. So watch the rest of this video, because he goes into, and again, I'm over time, I'm probably going to play most of this video in one video or another, because there's just so much good stuff in it. And then he gets into this question, which the church continues to have to wrestle with. Well, see, the problem with Christianity is just that it's so costly. Everybody says, well, I want to be like Jesus until you show him the cross. And it's like, well, that's not the part I wanted. I wanted what, the Galilean part, where you did, you know, where you did miracles and gave away stuff and were immensely popular. And everybody wanted to make you king. Well, let me tell you something, they'll make you king, they'll want to make you king one day, and they'll shout, crucify him on the next Friday. And so, or Thursday. John, synoptics, all this detail. Anyway, so all the way back to cherry picking. It's an orchard there. It's an orchard. And if you really want to deal with history, that one of the things that we note from the IDW, it's lacking historians. And this history is just too obvious and too fundamental. So this video is probably pretty long. So I'll end it here. I've not yet really figured out the process by which to make short videos, but I make the videos I can. So thanks for watching.