https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=M6QmOWI2Ysw

 Well, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Yeah, my name is Jean-Philippe. You can just call me JP. It's easier to pronounce usually. And I'm from Quebec, from a little country near Quebec City. And I was brought up Roman Catholic. But as a lot of people my age when I was a teenager, I fell away from the faith mainly. No, honestly, I think I was looking for arguments not to go to church because I just didn't like it much. So as soon as I started hearing about other religions, other worldviews, and also about science, then I sort of used that to make arguments to stop going. And eventually my parents let me. So but I was still interested by questions of ethics mainly. I still wanted to know does good exist? And if it does, what is it? Because if it exists, then indeed that's what I should do by definition. So I was still very much interested. And I had back still even in high school, I had interests in philosophy and science in general. I was interested by those questions. I ended up going in math and computer science for my undergraduate degree because I was just not very impressed by the philosophers. I read back then or the courses I had back then. You can get good luck or bad luck, especially in Quebec in the public education system. The teachers have a lot of room in the philosophy classes. And I think I stumbled upon postmoderns maybe. All the philosophy I saw was just people seemingly trying to ask more and more questions and never solving them and just being more and more miserable. So I wasn't very interested by that. And on the other hand, it seemed ridiculous because in my science classes, I was obviously learning true things about the world. And although it wasn't talking about ethics, at least we were making progress there. So I decided to go this way. And I thought that even if I don't succeed in demonstrating anything as far as ethics goes in my lifetime in mathematics, at least if I can somehow participate in the project, then my life will have meaning by transitivity. If the ultimate project makes sense, then it makes sense for me to contribute. But pretty soon in my undergrad, I saw the proofs for Gödel's incompleteness theorems. And I had heard about those theorems before my undergrad. But usually when a theorem sounds so impressive or so cool, there's usually no asterisks and very important hypotheses and stuff that you need to take into account, which really makes the theorem less impressive than it first sounds. But not in the case of that theorem. It just really cut the ground from under me. Are you looking at it like that? Can you explain that theorem to me? Yeah. Because I just heard about it. I was watching. So I did a conversation with Karen Wong, and she was talking to Travis, who also watches my channel. And somewhere along the line, they mentioned this incompleteness theorem. And it was the first time I'd ever heard about it. So I'd love to learn more about it. It's been a while. I won't try to go into too much details, but I'll get to the general idea of it. It's in just a short statement, is that any formal system? So a formal system, yeah, I should take the time to say what a formal system is. It's a system of syntax and a set of rules to manipulate the syntax. So numbers with addition and subtractions and rules for those, it's a formal system. Yep. And the output of the statement of the theorem is that any formal system that is complete, what I have to, I don't remember the exact formulation. It's in this system. There are two parts of this theorem. I'll state one that I remember for sure, because I don't want to make a mistake. But any system that is complete and coherent cannot prove, no, actually no formal system is both complete and consistent. And no formal system can prove its own consistency. Those are the two branches of the theorem. I ended up remembering them. And that applies to any formal system that is powerful enough to do a basic arithmetic. But yeah, put like that, it doesn't sound that impressive. But the philosophical implication behind this is that if you take a formal system like logic, you can create a mathematical, actually people did this 150, started doing this maybe 150 years ago, the mathematical logic to make, to be able to study it. And you can do very cool things using this. You say, what are the rules of logical implication in a system with such and such rules and such and such a hypothesis? What can you derive and so on. And at the beginning of that endeavor, people were very optimistic that we could formalize all of mathematics this way. You could write down all the rules of arithmetic and use them to derive multiplication and then division and more operations. You could talk about all the numbers and then you could prove all of the known theorems in mathematics in that very system. So it was a beautiful idea because you could have a system that starts really from the bottom, from the total ground, just a few axioms and you could prove everything in mathematics. And the idea was not only to do this, but also to be able to prove within that system that this system is coherent, meaning that it has no contradictions and also that it is complete. So that all the theorems that are true can be proven in this system. It seemed possible. People were very optimistic that it would work. And actually, even the guy who ended up proving that you can do it, namely Gödel, was trying to prove it while he disproved it accidentally. What happens when that happens is like, oh no! It gets me done! It was a real crisis in mathematics because actually it's even worse because prior to that there had been already a crisis in mathematics because some paradoxes had started coming up and people were starting to add a few sets of axioms they were working with and it seemed very natural but someone somewhere would show that actually your system that you've been working on for 20 years, there's actually an inconsistency there so it's worth absolutely nothing and people would be destroyed over this and it happened a couple of times and People were also doubting the Euclidean geometry because now you could remove one of the postulates and you still have something that works. So there was already a crisis in mathematics. So people were hoping that by formalizing everything and eventually showing that your system was complete and coherent, you could get over that existential problem in mathematics but Gödel just ended up cutting the ground from under that. So did you? Wow! That's quite something. I've never heard, that was the first time I had heard this on that one conversation. And the proof is really cool. The idea that Gödel's idea was that if you have in that formal system, if you're in any formal system, you can talk about the formal system itself because you can encode the formal system and the elements of the formal system and its rules. So if the formal system has multiplication, addition and all that stuff, you can describe them by a string of numbers and then you can describe the addition by when you do this with those numbers and you do this with those numbers. So you could talk about the system using the system but Gödel showed that it's actually not possible to prove that your system is complete or coherent in your system. If your system is consistent, if it's inconsistent then we can prove everything but you can do this within your system. And that shook my whole project because the whole reason why I chose to study mathematics and computer science to do logic was because I thought it was so rigorous that I had such firm ground to stand on but it turned out that it wasn't such firm ground. So I still finished my degree but I mean I hadn't answered my philosophical questions at all. I still didn't know what good was so I ended up moving on to philosophy and I'm lucky because in Quebec it's pretty cheap to go and do a graduate study. And also they let me pretty much jump into a graduate program as a way. I just took like a semester of undergrad classes and jumped right back into my masters. And the first point of entry for me was actually the thesis of my masters is the hard problem of consciousness because it really seemed like the first step away from nihilism or at least my version of it because I was a pretty hard physicalist back then. And that's something I wanted to talk to you about especially because you mentioned that a few times recently especially in relations to Vervecky. And because I've heard him in videos say that he's a physicalist. I also heard him in a conversation yesterday. I don't remember with who it was but he also said that he had an ontology of real relations meaning that for him what exists is relations. And I guess he's trying to pull those two things together meaning that the relations of physics are the relations that exist and that make up the world. But even then I think you still have the mind-body problem to deal with. It's not really I don't think you make that much progress. I don't think you make any progress at all really instead of just talking about just physicalism in general. And yeah I'm not sure in how much detail we want to go into this but I can maybe I don't know if you've heard about Mary's room argument. Yes yes. Yeah but that's one of the arguments that I found convincing and one of the arguments that I think it does show why physicalism is wrong or at least there's something missing with physicalism. No I have an even better idea because especially since you already know this there's I think a better way to see why physicalism is wrong is that something that even Bertrand Russell and other philosophers of science noticed is that even the ontology of physics it's sort of empty or it's just a container if you will because let's say physics tries to describe an electron. Physicists can say well the electron follows these laws it has such a mass and such a charge let's say. But this will never tell you the real nature of the electron or its essence. You will only ever know how the electron behaves. Right from the outside. Yeah you always only know physical entities intrinsically. You never know them intrinsically and you know it doesn't solve the problem to say well maybe electrons are made of smaller physical entities because you would just regress to the same problem only a step lower. The argument is usually applied this way to say that the ontology of physics is empty. It's applied on the particles but you could also say this about relations. So the relations of physics well you know how those relations behave but you don't know what those relations are intrinsically. Right. You still get the same problem. And in my master's I was trying to figure out what is the best solution on offer for this and specifically in my master's I was only able to get at naturalistic solutions because that's where I started from and I didn't have enough pages to go much further but there's a good solution right now at least a good starter solution which is panpsychism. So it's pretty elegant and it especially appeals to people who are interested by physicalism in the first place because you can still preserve all that ontology of physics you know as a science that describes the behavior of entities just not their intrinsic nature but you can say that the intrinsic nature of all those properties of all those entities is consciousness. So in the same way that I could describe a polyvendor physically you know a polyvendor physically is a pack of those particles it follows those laws and so on. And if you do something let's say you get up and you go grab some coffee then you know I can explain this physically by you know saying well this equation explains false movement but I can also instead give an intrinsic explanation using your consciousness you know you have a desire which really explains the physical behavior we observe. So you can have both you know your physics maintain your ontology of physics but you can put consciousness in there so you reinsert you can reinsert mind in matter. And it's catching quite some steam this solution at the moment. And yeah a funny thing about that when I was working on this especially starting my masters for about a year straight I had the zombie nightmares all night every night. Yeah it was sort it's actually not as bad as it sounds because you somewhat get used to it like when I didn't really think I was gonna die I guess I mean it just it's just not as bad as it sounds but I did have zombie nightmares all night every night for about a year and it makes sense now I didn't know at the time but you know it makes sense because I was wrestling with nihilism and I was doing it philosophically during the day and at night I was doing it symbolically with zombies especially if you heard the you know John Vervicki and Jonathan Peugeot talked about this a couple of times and yeah so I so in retrospective it was pretty natural that I was so obsessed with that I had so many nightmares about zombies although I had no idea about all the symbolism stuff back then. Fascinating. But the zombie nightmares were cut down by 90% already when I you know add that first inkling of a solution to the mind body problem because my world was re-enchanted in a pretty big way you know instead of being a physicalist I was a kind of a psychist. Yeah so it's it's much better. Interesting. Let me slow down a little bit I'm gonna do a screen share here I don't know if you've seen share share share I don't know if you've seen this video this this was this one was pointed out to me I'm doing a bit I'm working on a video right now that maybe if I get time tomorrow to record it I'm gonna deal with a whole bunch of these issues and probably not within the probably after now that we've talked about it it might be with some of this vocabulary that we're using this particular video is a really interesting conversation so you can see there's only 400 views on it. Yeah and it's the one I watched which type just oh okay because I thought this was a great video that's very interesting so that's very interesting so I'm gonna do I'm gonna do one with that and then also this one this one you might be interested in. Have you looked into I've talked a bit about Owen Barfield. Not that much. Do you know anything about Owen Barfield? Only what I've heard on your podcast. He's someone you'll want to look into so I'm gonna do a lot of the video I'm gonna talk a lot about this video Malcolm Malcolm Gate or Geit on Owen Barfield and Owen Barfield dealt with a lot of these things in the early mid 20th century and was important in the formation of CS Lewis. And so this this split world issue that Mary's Room we should probably for anybody listening I'll put the link to what to Mary's Room. I'll just I'll just quickly read it. In philosophy of mine Mary's Room is a thought experiment meant to demonstrate the non-physical nature of mental states. It is an example meant to highlight the knowledge argument against physicalism. The example first appeared by an article by Frank Jackson entitled Epiphenomenal Qualia which appeared in Philosophical Quarterly in 1982. The thought experiment is as follows. Mary lives her entire life in a room devoid of color. She has never directly experienced color in her entire life though she is capable of it. Through black and white books and other media she is educated on the neuroscience to the point where she becomes an expert on the subject. Mary learns everything there Mary learns everything there is to know about the perception of color in the brain as well as the physical acts about how light works in order to create the different color wavelengths. It can be said that Mary is aware of all physical facts and color about color and color perception. After Mary's study in color perception in the brain or complete she exits the room and experiences for the very first time direct color perception. She sees the color red for the first time and learns something new about it namely what red looks like. Jackson concluded that if physicalism is true Mary ought to have gained total knowledge about color perception by examining the physical work by examining the physical world but since there is something she learns when she leaves the room physicalism must be false as Jackson explains. It seems just obvious that we learn something about the world and our visual experience of it but then but then it is inescapable that her previous knowledge was incomplete but she had but she had all physical information ergo there is more there's more to have than that and physicalism is false so very interesting very interesting argument. So you wrote your master's thesis on this did you have you got any response back from your thesis? Not yet I'm I'm just I need to sort of format it and submit it right now okay and as I was you know this took this was pretty quick at least to formulate in my mind so I moved on to other you know philosophical issues at least you know that I had to do in my own mind. You know that I had to deal with personally as I was you know writing my master's still okay and the next problem I was trying to deal with was just ethics but that even if there is consciousness in the world and there's not just physics it's you know there's still the danger that maybe consciousness is so detached from the world or is so in use and critic from one person to another or from from one culture to another that maybe it's just relative and you end up with nihilism anyway so it took me longer to to deal with this objection and it's around the time that I learned about Jordan and his work and also eventually about John Breveke and Jonathan Height mostly and I think it's those three that helped me the most probably deal with this issue because it shows that if you look at how we develop morality you know in in real life it's something that we need to to construct with the environment in in the process of trial and error it's not something idiosyncratic because you can't do it on your own in your own bubble you need to actually test it and over time it improves if you if you want it to improve if you're honest and so on so it's not surprising that you know it takes a long time for you to develop your your moral sense and it can depending on your your your lineage what your ancestors left you left you you can have more or less uh you know of a a head start yeah so it can be more or less difficult but then it's not surprising that you know different it's not surprising that there is so much uh moral uh you know uh disagreement between people and also that there is a lot of you know convergence especially as people interact with each other and they're able to test their theories and develop their moral vision it's not it's not surprising and this uh allowed me to deal with the the objections well enough that again my zombie nightmares were cut down by another significant percentage so so at this point i was only having very little uh zombie uh nightmares but still uh i was still curious to as to how to fix those uh issues oh yeah and i should also say that around that time i started going back to to church uh to a catholic church because as a way to develop virtue basically that was my my main uh reason why um as jordan and uh yeah jonathan pageau also talk about it's a way to you know if you can embody the story and you know try to to get into them it allows you to you know try to embody those patterns even outside of church so to become more and more virtuous i wasn't sure about you know what god could mean philosophically and so on uh just well i'm still not sure but i was really unsure and uh so i was a bit iffy but i thought it was still you know worth it uh starting going back to church at least so that's uh that's what i did and uh yeah and yeah now how's that going well it's been it's been really good but i think there's something i should i should tell you there's a quick story i should tell you about jonathan first okay because about the remaining zombie nightmares i had a conversation with jonathan about this because i was supporting him on patreon and we had a phone call where uh we tried to figure out what what the symbolic solution would be to the zombie apocalypse because if i if i have another zombie nightmare let's say what should i do in that and it took a while for us to to to figure it out but you know by the end of the conversation we we had it and it was actually pretty simple and i'm surprised that we haven't seen it yet in in film it's well the the zombie apocalypse is it's a super version of the the christian resurrection story um yep so the the solution really is to flip it back again and it's pretty much do what christ would do uh he would you know trample down death by death he would uh do something like uh you know accept to become a zombie himself but he would be uncorrupted and you know come back still with his logos even though he's a zombie and in doing that it would it would not only not only save himself but it would save all the dead all the zombies he would bring them back all to their their their logos so that was the the solution and uh but right after this i i was really eager to have another zombie nightmare so i could try it but i didn't even have one anymore it just completely solved the the the and that made you know the the point about uh you know going to church and trying to to imitate christ and become more virtuous that made the point even more poignant because you know it had directly influenced my my nightlife at least my my my dream life um and so i was going to church and uh i had the a very fortunate uh uh i think it's my mom who heard about it there's a church with a bunch of young people here in quebec city um because you know in quebec you i mean you've heard this before but it used to be a very catholic place but with when the the scientific revolution in quebec in the 60s or 70s people had the choice and they chose basically to to to be their own gods and leave the the catholic church but so there's a bunch of you know parishes that are closing down and so on but there's also a sort of i guess a retreat to some more uh lively centers of catholic life and one there's one of them i i heard about and there's a very vibrant community there of you know people who look like me because you know that was something that was sort of shocking i mean not shocking but it makes it harder to participate in the in the in the mass when you're the only one who looks the way you look so it helped to see young people also uh it helped a lot to have lots of uh conversation partners right away i met uh actually maybe i think i eventually met four people there who were uh philosophy students i know at the same time that the time was and also a bunch of others who had been or i met also a bunch of other students in other disciplines you know be it science or the social sciences and so on so it was really good to be able to you know enter a community pretty pretty fast and it's because it's so lively you know not only that there is mass every day at least once a day there's also um lots of lots of activities just extra so you can socialize with people and you know uh volunteer and do a real bunch of stuff and that that yeah that that just i guess really fire into me it uh just allow me to to to grow up now it's like progressively you know as my as i fixed my existential issues my life just got better and better i the world just got more and more colored i especially it's suspicious surprising considering how um how pessimistic i was at first because it was like because going into philosophy in the first place was sort of a uh i guess a last hope because i thought it was worth a shot but i wasn't really hoping for much i was such i mean i was so determined that well if even math can't reach any uh good conclusion how good are the odds of you know that this lazy philosophy stuff how could that work it's so it's so uh unsafe but yeah i was pleasantly surprised and also a funny thing i guess is contrary to yet to i've been very blessed because as you mentioned several times you know when people who are you know fans of jordan and the idw first go into a church and they want to to talk about that stuff with people it's not that well received usually but for me it was yeah it was pretty natural to i mean i didn't talk directly about jordan and that stuff but to talk about you know their ideas people were generally interested and it was very easy for me and the other thing is i've also been blessed because just the fact that i don't need to look very much to find conversation partners because not only in my church community but even i think in general the fact of that i've studied philosophy makes it easier it's like every time i tell someone that i i'm finishing up my masters people have just so many questions and they just throw me all their philosophical theories and they just want to talk so much like people are very hungry for this stuff i guess huh wow interesting that's really what i found at least here in quebec i don't know if people in america are hungry to talk philosophy at least if you walk into a random church and say anybody want to talk philosophy i don't i don't know that that would be interesting to find out they're they're hungry to talk at at the jordan peterson meetups i i see that interesting i'm taking quite a bit of notes you might have noticed i've added these to a lot of the talks that i do oh no i haven't actually i am because you don't even watch is because do you listen to the audio form yeah okay yeah yeah so so what's next for you well uh oh yeah i should say that i've been working full time as i'm finishing up my masters for the last uh like 14 months i guess because i was worried i was starting to turn into peter pan maybe uh so what job do you do what are you working at i work in in tech um it's hard to describe my role exactly it's uh i'm an api writer which isn't that very descriptive um i know what apis are okay good so you might you might as well explain it though because not everybody will know what they are i'm impressed that you know because almost nobody does but i i'm part of the documentation team at my company and uh so i write documentation on how to use our code and i also do some programming on the documentation site itself so i do it allows me to do you know the range of my my interest is to do some more technical stuff but also to write as i've been doing in philosophy basically and uh yes i've been doing that for uh over a year over a year because you know in studying especially in the social sciences or in philosophy in the humanities generally it it feels like you can get trapped in your own end that get you know scared of the real world so i was i was sort of fearful that might happen and i wanted to start working and uh yeah it's been it's been really good i wasn't i shouldn't have been that worried i guess but it's been a good experience and i'll plan on doing that at least for the next year because uh especially my my girlfriend who i met at church right away she uh will be uh traveling uh uh for uh for school next year she'll be living in in paris and my job allows me to go there for several months so i'll spend a good chunk of the year uh in paris probably so that's at least the the plan for for next year um and uh after that i'll see i've got a couple of options but yeah for at least in next year i've got i've got my plan wow so things have fallen into place quite nicely for you yeah no longer have zombie nightmares you started going to church you got the girl um i mean you're you're living the hero's journey yeah um yeah really blessed i'm very thankful wow wow so so your panpsychism i'm a little interested in i'm a little interested in that and how how because i i think i understand how your panpsychism resolves the dilemmas of physicalism for you but how is so so you don't have a problem looking at me let's say and saying well he's a he's a biological evolved uh creature simultaneously you know is is conscious now when you say panpsychism i mean quite literally pan is pan is pan i mean it's everything so is you know so let's let's let's take a book how does your panpsychism work with a book because a book a book is another one of these things that is interesting because i can very from a from a physical point of view i can very much understand the pages and the paper and the ink but then the ink has obviously thought encoded on it for that thought to actually however come into what i would call the story space or you know i it would it would require a conscious being such as myself to read it and act it out so so how does that how does that work in your system well um i i'll give first the the typical answer that a panpsychist would give at least in you know in the english-speaking world in in philosophy right now and then i'll give what uh another another option what uh will typically happen today uh people will tell you that well if you look at you know the the fundamental particles and at this level uh those are are conscious that's what a panpsychist would say although their consciousness is is very simple it's something elementary that's what a panpsychist would typically say um but then they would claim that you know depending on how the the fundamental consciousnesses of the fundamental particles combine the combination may or may not be conscious depending on you know what the combination is so uh in your case for example uh if i took your all the if i take all the fundamental particles and their consciousnesses their combination is your consciousness uh all but if i take the all the fundamental consciousnesses of the the particles of the book uh they do not combine into a more complex consciousness the book would just be unconscious but um to to answer your question another possibility um because you know uh yeah first i'll say something about the uh principalities and powers in the same way that you know when you paul make a decision and your consciousness influences your fundamental particles and their consciousnesses there can be perhaps uh uh you know principalities and powers who uh make choices over us which impact us still you know the just higher consciousnesses you can see yeah and it's uh it's possible that you know as far as the consciousness of a book maybe uh it could be one of those principalities or powers so the so if you were to yeah i think that's something impenpsychus would say that you know then the you know what is exactly the body of that uh that consciousness would be very complicated it would be very distributed you know it's somewhere in the book it's also in you know the the people who have read the book and maybe it would even extend beyond that but yeah i guess that's something impenpsychus could say although it's not a question i've seen uh answered really typically especially in the english-speaking world pencychism has only been resurfacing for the last guess maybe 20 years um because in analytic philosophy in the english-speaking world that people just didn't want to do metaphysics for a while they were just seemingly traumatized uh and uh it took a while for it to come back and people are just now starting to you know very timidly look back at pencychism although it used to be more popular but for now they're not really addressing those questions and even then there's something i should mention especially a uh it's a point i've heard um uh john bravici mentioned in one of his videos he said that uh the main reason why he wanted to be a physicalist is because of what is called the causal closure of the physical um because you know if the laws of physics all uh as we uh as a good scientist uh you know would claim then whatever let's say you do should be predictable uh should not break those laws of physics and so in other words uh there is no real room for you know if there is anything extra physical it could not influence the physical world because it has though it has its own physical laws that hold so if you wanted to claim that you know consciousness is not something physical right then it would be you know causally inert it would be sort of trapped in your in your machine so you wouldn't want to be physicalist because of that but that's something the the penpsychist can get around by saying that well uh it's not really that the the the consciousness is the the causal powers of consciousness is uh separate or in competition with the causal powers of the physical world it's more that intrinsically the the causality that we say is physical is really conscious it's just the talking about it physically is to describe the behavior of those that that causality but if you want to know the the reason or the the real essences that are involved in those those causal relations then you need to go look at consciousness so like i mentioned in your with your coffee example um then you know the the causality can be described physically by saying that you follow uh you follow this law but a better explanation is to to say that well the real causality is your your desire to to grab a coffee so though so those two causal chains are not in competition there uh it's just that the you can describe them yeah you can describe the the the causal chain intrinsically using consciousness you can describe it extrinsically using the language of physics it's that that mirrors again you're gonna boy you're gonna like the video i'm working on now because it gets into because barfield barfield gets into the inside view and the outside view and it sounds very similar to to what you're describing there's there's almost two systems and and one of the things so one of the one of the books that i enjoy reading a lot is is cs lewis's book miracles and one of the interesting things i find about cs lewis cs lewis in miracles uses reason as in a in a in a kind of interesting way reason in cs lewis's book miracles is sort of a a heavenly power by which uh it's something that god places in us i wouldn't i wouldn't equate it with consciousness um it's i think more has to do with intelligibility and and exposing relationships between separate things well one of the one of the one of the things that i think about a lot now is you know what do we mean by this question of real and there's a there's a there's a guy in south africa who who actually i swapped quite a few he found me pretty early on and we saw emails quite a bit and he's got a lot of ideas he's the one actually that turned me out to vervecky and because he just kept hammering me says so you gotta watch vervecky you gotta watch vervecky and then vervecky started doing he had the buddhism and cognitive psychology but the sound was pretty crappy in that and then he he really started doing this the meaning crisis videos which he's doing now for which the production value is is considerably better especially the sound which is tremendously helpful but you know one of the one of the things one of the one of the working definitions now i'm not a philosopher i'm i'm just a pastor and i'm just trying to figure stuff out and talk about it but you know that one of the one of my one of my working definitions of real is is basically that which governs or that which colonizes because and and so when you look at the relationship between i mean when i listen to you talk about panpsychism it's almost like it there's so then there's a two there's a two system there's there's two systems in the in the in the world there's the physicalism and then there's the sight then there's consciousness then the interesting questions all become well what are the relationships between these two things and you know on one hand to be a little graphic of course um i'll be less graphic but the the end of the the end of my physical life in the physical system say i have a heart attack or i get shot by a gun you know that that in the physical system says well that's the if you're a physicalist that says that consciousness is an emergent value of of certain arrangements of of physics and matter well then consciousness ends obviously with panpsychism you sort of have two systems so there's a degree of protection uh consciousness does not go away if matterness no no so you've got it bound that's really interesting because go ahead well it can i guess it can get complicated as in the example of the book let's say yeah so that it's not clear i mean for now especially panpsychists have no real idea how exactly are the the project would be to study those exactly those i guess those laws that all between the the on the one side the physical the physical and the the conscious how those two exactly fit and people don't really know what those would be you know and there are obvious candidates like maybe the human consciousness has to do with a certain configuration in the brain but there are a lot of philosophers and cognitive scientists who believe that a more likely candidate would be not only not only the whole body but even the body and part of the environment so your your consciousness would not only involve you know your the brain as a metaphysical substrate but you can and it can also even go much further maybe your own consciousness is in part of you know your your relatives or the your loved ones maybe your you can be distributed this way and maybe it can be even more complicated you know if you become uh i mean we can see it in quebec maybe because we have so many of our towns and streets are named after religious figures maybe if you become a saint and you can influence uh you know not only your your relatives and the people you know but even you know a lot more people uh you can maybe your consciousness is spread over all all of them it can it's hard to say yes that's right so so if you're a penpsychist your you know your physical substrate can go very far it's it you know what you'll typically see right now is people try to constrain it to the brain but it doesn't have to to be so necessarily or or to limit identity to skin you know and when you have something like a family you know i was reflecting i was talking to um shoot i forget her name the quality existence the the conversation i had with i don't know if you heard that conversation i had with her you know when my when my sister passed away and and and so i i usually talk to my mother and sometimes my other sister on mondays because i try to take mondays a little light but you know just watching the significant impact of the death of my sister on my mother and you you really you know what is what exactly is the bond between mother and child there's something deep and profound in that bond when when it's right you know and and and of course church fathers make a lot of use of this in their theological formulations of things like the trinity i was i was listening to nathan jacobs who i talked to not too long ago and he's got some conversations with hank hannigraaff you know the bible answer man there's a title that was from a previous era um but you know going through going through some of the some of the thinking behind the trinity and what that means there's there's a lot more there's a lot to a lot of this that we don't really know and shoot we're just about out of time but this this has been really cool i really appreciate you you know reaching out to me and you know taking the time to walk through a bunch of this stuff thanks for having me it's uh i've been listening to your channel for for a while and i really appreciated it so i'm really happy to be able to to speak to you it was you should reach out have you met have you talked to john vervecky at all individually no no you should reach out to him he's very he's very open and receptive and i've been you know part of the part of the downside of jordan peterson's status rocket ride is that you know there's there's thousands and thousands of people lining up to talk to him and because you know one conversation at a time one can only have that many conversations so he's he's obviously tougher to tougher to talk with but um i think uh well will you know if you're in agreement we'll probably post this and john keeps track of my channel and um i'll try and put something in the comment to get his attention and a lot of the people that john is that following john students of his are watching my channel and i'm sure helping him you know say oh you should pay attention to this video that's been a huge help to me like strun i never say his name right he's from south africa um he you know he's been a tremendous help to me in the ways that he finds a video and that video that that where where vervecky talks about ontology you know that's the one he pointed to me right away and of course i get so many videos and books thrown at me now that i have to kind of wade through them and i let my um relevance realization off and pick and i was in so i listened to that when i try to listen to things while i'm doing chores and air and so i was in cosco when i was listening to that doing grocery shopping for the family i was listening to that video i thought oh this is one of the this is a really good conversation i've i've really wanted because one of the haunting questions that i've been you know when i listen to all the vervecky stuff is ontology still matters um ontology still governs in in a lot of things and so even though i think there's a there's a there's an area there's a degree of skepticism that people have about ontology you can't just do away with it yeah i think it's really important you know i mean it was the first step for me really because if you don't have that you're you're detached from your from your body really there's always a doubt that maybe you're just a machine even you know if like vervecky does and you know he wants to put you know vices virtues and you know all of our minds mind basically he wants to put it not not stuck in our in our head but he wants to make it embodied in the world with other people and wants to put our you know see ourselves in in an agent arena world agent arena i don't remember the term is not key but he wants to not isolate us and put us in the world so that you know meaning is not just something stuck in our head but right still you know even if maybe all that that consciousness is superfluous i mean if you don't address the the physicalism issue maybe all that just is is physical maybe it's just a complex machine of relations but maybe those relations are just physical and then you still have the the the the nihilism there yeah yeah yeah no i agree i agree wow so are you going to do philosophy as a career is that kind of what you're hoping to i'm not sure really um it's kind of a risk yeah i know you're gonna get a phd that's what i would have to do but i kind of want to get married and have a family and it's not i mean it's sort of risky to you know start and start a phd so yeah yeah i don't know okay well i i i'm sure glad that you you contacted me and reached out to me and and signed up for a slaw this is this has been this has been great fun and i really appreciate i really appreciate you walking through this stuff and very cool very cool so i will you know with i will send this video to you and with your permission i'll post it now i got a pretty good stack right now so it might be a week or two before it gets posted so don't um don't don't don't worry but um this has been great thank you thanks it's been very fun thanks for having me all right you take care take care bye bye