https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=nIHREft3HoI

 What if human violence is not a bug, but a feature? I think our Western society assumes that people are generally good, and if left to ourselves, we're going to be nice to one another. And violence is an aberration, but being kind and nice and gentle to one another, that's normal. What if it's the other way around? I played part of this clip, this conversation between Eric Weinstein and Peter Thiel in Eric's first edition of The Portal in a previous video that I made about the Joker. I'm going to do more talking about Joker today and compare it to another movie. If this little experiment I'm doing goes well, there might be shorter and longer versions of this video, and you'll look in the feed and you'll see shorter ones and longer ones, and I'll try and note that if I in fact am able to pull it off. I'm trying to offer different size videos, and for those of you who like the normal one to two hour, the one to two hour videos, that will be available. Those who want a shorter version, that will be available. So I want to go back and look again at this video, and that'll be in the longer version, and not looking at this video will be in the shorter version, and you'll just get to some subsequent points. Okay, let's play this one again, because I think it's really a rather remarkable conversation. There is something that's very weird and punitive about the desire for redistribution. Now notice we're right away talking about equality, and this is not just a conversation for Eric Weinstein, who coined the term the IDW. If you go back to maps of meaning and the beginning of maps of meaning, this is Jordan Peterson's obsession. Why would the different attempts to address inequality in the world, one of which being Soviet communism and the other being free market, why would the conflict between these two ideas bring two superpowers willing to put life itself at risk? All about this question of inequality, partly because in a rather low resolution way, we equate the questions of inequality with justice. I mean, there's almost a desire to tag the wealthy that has nothing to do with taking care of the unfortunate. And this, of course, was George Orwell's observation, and Peterson makes this point often in his lectures and classes. And what I really am talking about here is how do we get a conversation between left and right, which isn't cryptic, which isn't, you know... Of course, I have a... Now, Eric and Brett and others, including myself, want to facilitate conversations between different sides. That is becoming, interestingly enough, in this age of polarization, a salvation strategy for us. Now, I think it's far better for us to talk than to fight. I'm all for that. It's better that our ideas die than people die. No argument there. But it's interesting how this is coming up again and again, and we're going to see that in a rationalities rules video that I'm going to play a little bit later in this video. It's more cynical view of this, where I think the redistribution rhetoric, it's mainly not even targeted at the wealthy. It's targeted at the lower middle class, at the deplorables, or whatever you want to call them. Lower middle class? Or how about even below that? A way to tell them that they will never get ahead, nothing will happen in their life. Now, that fear that the lower middle class is dealing with is basically skepticism about the American dream, which is certainly part of the American religious matrix. And that's actually why a lot of people who are lower middle class or middle class are viscerally quite strongly opposed to welfare, because it's always an insult to them. It's always heard as an insult. And I'm not sure they're wrong to feel that. Well, and I feel that a lot of the talk about redistribution is actually families of high eight through 11 figures trying to figure out how to target families of six figure through low eight figure wealth as the targets of the redistribution. That the very wealthy will be able to shelter assets and protect themselves or maybe even switch nations, whereas people who are dentists and orthodontists and accountants are going to be the ones viewed as the rich who are going to be incapable of getting themselves out of the way. So I think that partially what what good faith conversation between left and right opens up is that we have a shared interest in uncovering all of the schemes of the people who enjoy pushing around pieces of paper and giving speeches in order to engineer society for their own reasons. Thank you. Now, now that's, as I mentioned, my previous take on this video where there were sound problems and and burn power fixed it up with with the exception of the one weird voice thing in the middle, which was a complete accident on his part, he assures me. Here again, it's interesting that Eric is positing, well, not a not an avoidance of class warfare, but a a different restructuring of class warfare. And again, we have good guys and bad hat bad guys, black hats and red hats or black hats and white hats, where it's the the uber rich. So so in a sense, a populist, a populist view, at least a populist view from the perspective of a very wealthy man now wealthy man in comparison to let's say me. But he has some of that F you money as the IDW likes to say. One way I would I would restate what you just said would be that, you know, redistribution from the powerful to the powerless from the rich to the poor is like from the powerful to the powerless. And so using power to go after those with power. And that's almost oxymoronic. It's almost self contradictory. And so in other words, we have this narrative going around currently that that power is an evil thing. When I was at the Wellesley graduation last year, I was amazed to hear on one hand, the the administration of Wellesley College bragging about how they were going to stand up for the weak and stand up for those without power. And and they were going to speak truth to power and all of this talk from below. And the next minute they turn around and brag about how powerful the the Wellesley alumni network was that this was the most powerful network. And it's like, now, wait a minute, is powerful good is power good or bad? And usually it boils down as well. Power in the right hands or power in the hands of people who agree with me. And as that pool gets smaller, power in my hands. There may be some way to do that. I think most the time you end up with with some fake redistribution, some sort of complicated shell game of one sort or another. Right. And, you know, the the varying. I know the causation of the stuff is much, much trickier. But if we if we look at societies that are somehow further to the left on some scale, the inequality, you have to go really far to the left before and maybe just destroy the whole society before you really start solving the inequality program. OK, so now pay attention here because this is a big theme in the Underneath the Joker movie. How much do you have to tear down to get justice? And there are voices in our society that want to tear everything down and they're going further and further back in terms of the the source of where things went wrong. And so if we can tear things down, maybe to the beginning of the colonial period or or maybe to the beginning of Christianity. Now, no one really has a serious conversation about, well, how far back do you want to go? Christians, of course, go back all the way to Genesis three, but we'll keep going. Problem. California, when I first moved here as a kid in 1977, would have been sort of a centrist state in the U.S. politically and was broadly middle class. Today, California is the second most democratic states, a D plus 30 state. It's super unequal and and at least on a correlated basis, not causation, but at least on a correlated basis. The further to the left, it's gone, the more unequal it's become. Which is truly a remarkable thing that a number of people have been pointing out recently. And there is something pretty weird about that. And also, you know, the homeless issue, something that those of you who watch my videos regularly know that I deal with personally on a very regular basis as a pastor. You know, this is this is an issue that is sort of running amok in the in the left coast America. And as I've said many times before, and I'll say in this video, too, the archetype of the Democratic Party is kindness and the archetype of the Republican Party is strength. And these cities are are a little bit unsure of what to do with themselves as they're dealing with. Well, they want to show kindness to the homeless. But as the population increasingly gets disturbed at the disorder and the inconvenience and the health issues and all of these things that come with the disorder of people living along the sides of the roadways or under bridges or in public parks. These are the kinds of things that make that makes states turn the the the mythology of of the left tends to be well, we'll just keep moving left and that that continual progress to the left will be the will be, of course, the salvation of history. And you have I forget what is the famous Hollywood writer at the Trump election talking to his daughters about how this will never happen again. This is an aberration in the march of history. Oh, I'd not be so sure. There is, you know, something that sort of fits in here is that in part I've learned from you and you can tell me whether you recognize in this formulation or not is start with any appealing social idea. That's step one. Step two, ask what is the absolute minimal level of violence and coercion that would be necessary to accomplish that idea. Right there. Big idea. Big question. Big thought. And and I think a few years ago, dreamers would say we can accomplish all of this without violence. But as the authoritarian left continues to emerge, well, Antifa, the the question is not so much for human beings to be violent or not to be violent. Generally speaking, it is more what is the justification of violence? And here what you see built into this question is what narrative do we believe in that will afford violence? And and let's just say let's just imagine the moral choice would be a minimum of violence. Now add that to the original idea. Do you still find your original idea attractive? And that this flips many of these propositions into territory where I suddenly realize that something that people see as being very attractive actually can only be accomplished with so much misery. Right. Even if it's done maximally efficiently, that it's no longer a good idea. And I think that this influence, I mean, this has been very influential in my thinking. What I've looked at the the the visceral problem with communism is not is not its redistributive tendencies. It's the extreme violence that you have to kill tons of people. You know, there's always there's always a one of the professors I studied under at Stanford, the René Girard, was a great philosophical, sociological, anthropological thinker. And he had this observation that he thought communism among Western intellectuals became unfashionable. You could date it to the year 1953, the year Stalin died. And the reason was they were they were not communist in spite of the millions of people being killed. They were communist because of the millions of people that were being killed. As long as you were willing to kill millions of people, that was a tell, a sign that you were were building the utopia. You were building a great new society. That was virtue signaling, killing the millions of people. Now, we're going to play. I'm going to play a fair amount of René Girard later in this video in the long term version of this video, at least. And that's such an interesting thought, because that adds to the question. What if what if violence is not a a bug, but a feature? What if we know something is valuable? Well, Don McLean sang it, the more you pay, the more it's worth. The ancient Aztecs and their sacrifices believe that, well, through the through the sacrifice of greater and greater victims, we will achieve greater and greater results. Really a wonderful video that Jordan Peterson had done, which is was on the biblical series playlist, but is now taken down because of copyright reasons. And I hope they put it up again, you know, talked about sacrifice. And there's a sense in which we know the greater the sacrifice, the greater the reward. And so could it be that this is just a radical thought by Girard and now by Thiel that could it be that the attraction to communism was not in spite of the bloodshed, but because of it? Would human beings actually be that evil, that bloodthirsty? Now, we're complicated creatures and we have all kinds of ways of of making ourselves look good, because morality in some ways is a is a game of more of a game of status amongst each other. And the status game has changed completely because of Christianity. And you can see this because if you look at, let's say, the Assyrians who bragged about their bloodthirstiness and they bragged about their brutality and the Romans did too. You did not crucify people behind prison doors with just a few witnesses and observers. You crucified people along the highways and byways. Your violence was what proved your power. OK, it wasn't they didn't do it apologetically. And so right away we have to ask, well, what changed and what changed in terms of the moral status games we play? And did that actually change how we are deep inside? And when you stopped, you know, it was just going to be like lethargy of the Brezhnev or something like that. And that that was not inspiring. I mean, people shift from Stalin to Mao or Castro or but but the violence was charismatic. I think very charismatic. And then but then also, you know, if you think about it, it's very undesirable. I think that there is so fascinating that we actually finally get to something like this. I think that that is a correct description of part of the communist movement, but not all of the communist movement. There were a lot of people, I think, in that just my own family was certainly involved in far left politics and some of it probably dipped into. Now, here you get into the question of whether there were real communists or not. And if I were rationality rules, there'd be a little fallacy, a little he has these little handy fallacy guides in his videos that always make me laugh. And then this little thing pops up and says, oh, no true Scotsman's fallacy communism. What my sense of it was is that there was a period in the 30s where people realized that there had to be coordinated social action and that there were people who were too vulnerable. And that that somehow got wrapped up in all of the things that Stalin was talking about that sounded positive if you didn't know the reality. So, for example, Paul Robeson, a hero of the of the of the left, was extolling Stalin Stalin's virtues openly. My guess is, is that he didn't fully understand what had happened, that he had gotten involved in an earlier era and that as things became known and progressed, there was a point at which many people suddenly opened their eyes and said, I've been making excuses for the Soviet Union because at least it had the hope. I mean, you know, there were American blacks, for example, who moved to Moscow because of the the hope that it was going to be a racially more equal society. My own family, you know, I would say, was talking about, you know, interracial marriage and homosexual open support of homosexuality, female access to birth control. Those things were associated with the Communist Party. And a lot of those ideas are now commonplace, but we forget that, you know, once upon a time, only the communists were willing to dance with these things. Yes. I don't want to make this too ad hominem, but I want to say that people like your family were likely very intelligent people, but were somehow still always the useful idiots. And there was no country where the communists actually came to power, where people like those in your family actually got to make the decisions. And we're back to good guys and bad guys. And what we're not paying any attention to is, well, how do people's positions in the world change them? Because what we're going to see when we actually look at a video from from Brett's brother, Eric, what we're going to see is that, well, a lot of what we do is because of where we are and how we are and what's going on. Now, what's interesting in this is that we're really talking about human nature and human nature is a funny thing. And, well, what goes into human nature is what if killing is a feature and not a bug? Now, one of the things that I've been paying a lot of attention to is in conversations over the line between theists and non theists, listening very carefully to ideas about God. Jordan Peterson's biblical series, the first lecture, the idea of God, God is an idea. And I often call that God number one versus God number two, who is a God being a living agent. Now, when you listen to when you listen to people talk about God, they're very careful on both sides, I'd say, because what they're doing, they're both doing is appealing to different communities. And there's a status line and there's a there's a technology line because there's a science line because I think part of the part of the no God side is we want to have systems. We want to have systems and ideas and we want to have knowledge that is God free. And so this, of course, develops out of the out of the post Darwinian world where Darwin breeds the hope in people that blind processes, random processes will will yield the kind of world that we live in the kind of world where we are agents, we are alone in the world as agents, as John Verbeke says in his meeting crisis videos that the world is in a sense dead outside of us. And we are the only living things. We are the only agents that we know. Is there anything out there? We don't know. And so this this really is the line. And it's a status line. So if you're in a in a Christian or theistic community, you have status for saying, yes, there is a God. And if you're an atheist sticker agnostic community, you have status for saying, no, there isn't a God. And it's important to understand that sometimes this line can get very thin because theists and non theists can act very, you know, can act very much the same way. And there can be a lot of agreement over a great many things. So so what exactly is the difference? Well, there's no God number two. There's no intent or purpose in historical events. There's there's no one watching. The processes are blind. There's no one. There's no one caring. There's no purpose to any of this. Now, this usually gets played into the word supernatural. All is nature. And we're going to see that in a C.S. Lewis reading that that I'll go into a little bit later, at least in the long version. There's no supernatural. And so we have these imagined laws of physics and why we call them laws. Well, that's another one of these grammatical, historical legacy items. They're laws of physics that that somehow are eternal or emergent and no one knows from where they come or how long they'll last. Or if this if there's if maybe we can account for them without multiverse or perpetual cycles. But those, of course, just keep pushing the thing back. And there's no afterlife consequentialism permitted. Yet yet people who have migrated over into the nuns are a little bit anxious by this point. You can see the work of of Nathan Jacobs in that. But it's it's part of the secular bargain because it's the world just maybe at least we would rather have an empty administration of the universe rather than one that has turned a blind eye to the horrific events of negligence that caused, let's say, a Korean fairy to to sink or perhaps a lighted stove to light a house on fire and allow a favorite uncle to die, so on and so forth. Now, now, courtesy makes people very soft on this point at funerals and with grieving people. And so there's lots of fuzzy talk about a better place or something like that because there doesn't seem to be any cost to that. But when people get serious about things like politics or science or or morality, we want no God present. Now, this very much gets into the question of of bug or feature because you can't make that call. You can't make that call at all if. Well, if there is no purpose, if everything is, as the credo goes, a product of blind chance or random events, that there is no design in any of this. And so there is no such thing as a bug, which would be an unintended consequence or an error, because error is a function of intentionality. And there would be no such thing as a feature. Killing is simply what people do. And to say that people are good is to make a statement that has beneath it a religious foundation or has above it a religious assertion. Now, are we natural born killers? Do human beings have a nature? Is it a product of blind evolution? Are we simply as we are without design? Then again, feature and bug judgments are always in the mind of the beholder. So if the if the title of this video, what if killing is a feature and not a bug? If that offends you? Well, I've probably uncovered some latent religiosity. Now, there was a terrific video done by Brett Weinstein, Eric's brother, that this is probably my favorite of all of his videos, where he's speaking at a different place. And he calls this the fourth frontier. And he talks about human beings and this pattern of ours to go out and expand in new territory. It's at the beginning of the classic Star Trek episode from the 60s. Now, we have a very romantic way of thinking, a romanticism in our thinking about human beings that that we somehow are good and and society or circumstance pushes us into error. But that begs the question about our imagined evolutionary programming. And what I think Brett's presentation suggests is that human generosity is a luxury good and not really our basis. It's it's what we do when we have extra. It's what we do, quite frankly, post Christianity when we want to when we want to assert a moral goodness pre Christianity. Well, mercy and generosity might be something I'm reading Dynasty, one of Tom Holland's earlier earlier books right now. Caesar might show, you know, might show generosity or forgiveness when he's in a position of secure power. But but he does so usually for the sake of building coalitions. It's an instrumental desire, and it's certainly not a sacrificial desire. So again, I want to play some of Brett's video. And if you're in for the shorter video, well, you can find the link below. I don't know if I'm going to do this thing. We'll see when I finally decide to compile this or not compile this. I'll see whether I do the shorter or longer seems like kind of a pain. But but I'll pause it right now and then I'll jump into Brett's video. OK, as I said before, this is this is one of my favorite Brett Weinstein videos. So the first thing we have to talk about is human nature. Human nature is a very difficult topic until you figure out where to stand in order to to understand it. Now, again, it's important to remember that for Brett, human nature is is an accidental thing. It is not intentionality. There is no there is no God who is intending us to be a certain way for good or for ill. And of course, this gets into theological questions quickly. But but what Brett would say is that, well, we are programmed and we are programmed by the evolutionary process that that yielded us as we are now. Part of the problem with human nature is that there is no human nature per se. If you think about all of the things that human beings have been known to do over the millennia, you will recognize that human beings can do a great many things from hunting marine mammals to farming the sea to intensive agriculture. And so all of those things suggest that there's something about human beings that is very odd for a creature, for a creature to do that many different things simultaneously. Now, Brett really has a habit of. Certain kind of double speak, and I think this is a great example of it. First, he talks about human nature, but then, well, we don't really have a human nature. And now he's going to go. He's going to continue to describe our human nature, which is I think he's I think this is sort of a way of saying that our nature is not human. He's going to say that our nature is tremendously complex because he's about to put his finger on a certain aspect of our behavior that seems to be pretty deep within us and pretty rational for creatures that like pleasure and avoid pain that like the the comforts that plenty seem to afford and fear the anxiety that what seems to create within us. Pushes our understanding of the idea of creature. But before human beings are something very special, they are creatures that are built around the same purpose that other creatures are built. And it is a little. See, he goes. He keeps going back and forth over things like this. Hard to specify exactly what that purpose is, but I have found it very useful to think in terms of what I call pie chart logic. Human beings like other creatures are interested in discovering opportunities that are either unexploited or exploited by some entity that is not capable of defending that resource. So when when creatures discover such an opportunity, they experience a burst of non zero sum dynamics. So zero sum dynamics are dynamics where in order for one individual to win, somebody else has to lose when one discovers a new opportunity. Nobody has to lose in order for others to win. And so there is a quest ongoing for all evolved creatures. Now, this is a really I love this idea. This is a really cool idea. And I think this is true. And I think this has a lot to do with our our moral faculties, especially post Christianity, that well, we like free and. Well, it's you know, we like and if there seems to be no cost, well, then there's no moral cost to us, too. And and now this morality has a great deal to do with with status, which is which is why Jesus says a lot of the things that he does in the Sermon on the Mount. About Jesus admonitions to not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing when you are do not practice your deeds of benevolence and generosity before men and women that others might see it. Why? Well, do it only so that God alone sees it and not everyone else. So God will know and you're not doing it in order to get the praise of others. That's a very counter human thing because we do our deeds before each other in order to gain status. And again, I've been reading Dynasty. And if you look at the Caesars, this this is human nature playing itself out. All right. So when we can find that we can take and have and possess seemingly at low cost or no cost, not take a social hit. Well, we really like that to discover non zero sum opportunities because they create an increase in evolutionary well-being. Now, the chart on on the screen will allow you to understand that there are various kinds of ways to experience a burst of non zero sum growth. And you can increase the size of the slice of pie that your population has available to it, or you can push the sides of the pie into somebody else's territory. Anything that results in an increase in the size of the slice of pie that a particular population has available to it is a a temporary non zero sum circumstance, which is highly desirable. Now, when I for a while ago, I was going through the book of the Book of First Samuel and you just get a window into that culture. And basically what you could do in the vicinity of of what is you know, what would become Israel would be you can either grow the crops yourself or you can raid your neighbors and steal their crops once they've grown them for you. And and so you have a lot of these dynamics going on. But all of that is built on built on a categorical question of who who is who is us and who is them. So you have this in-group out-group thing going. And as I've mentioned before, if you read something like Blood and Thunder, which is a very interesting novel about the country, you'll see that there's a lot of different things going on. Blood and Thunder, which is a very interesting novel about the conquest of the Navajo by by Kit Carson. You know, almost every almost every people group in the world called themselves the people and called the others not people. You see that with Greeks and barbarians or Romans and barbarians and Jews and Gentiles. The first World War with with the Hun, the Second World War with the Japanese. And what we do is we use words and phrases that that dehumanize the other. And we do this with, you know, so and so is a monster. OK, they're not human. They're a monster. And so this is these are the games that we play. And in other words, we rig the categories so we can practice, we can make things, you know, we can expand the frontiers for ourselves. So this has resulted evolutionarily in an addiction to growth. That is to say, creatures discover these opportunities, they exploit them, and they are constantly in a quest to find new ones. Growth is effectively what winning feels like in evolutionary terms. Right. So we call it growth in economic terms. But really, it is the same property that other creatures experience when they find a new location or a new mechanism for doing things that is superior to the old one. Now, the important part from the perspective of understanding human beings is to realize that human beings have been through every single population that exists today has been through a series of oscillations, discovering new non zero sum opportunities, exploiting them, filling them up. And at the point that they have become full, they become zero sum dynamics again. That means that we have to have within us programs effectively that deal with both phases. Now, it is my argument that when we have non zero sum dynamics, when we have one of these bursts of growth, people are capable of being wonderful to each other. And they often do that. And then when those non zero sum opportunities are spent, people go into a different phase. And part of what creates trouble for humanity is that if we live in an abundant phase, we tend to expect that that is human nature. So in other words, human generosity is a luxury good. When the dynamics set in that do not have that benevolence built into them, we tend to think something has gone awry and we seek to reinstate that that former burst of growth. Now, ecologists have a couple of terms that are useful in terms in terms of thinking about this. It is not that when we find a non zero sum opportunity, there is no competition. That is a misunderstanding of the biology of the circumstance. When we find a new opportunity, there is a kind of competition, but it is not head to head competition. It is what ecologists would call exploitation competition, where you compete by capturing that resource, but you don't necessarily interfere with other individuals trying to do the same thing. The alternative is interference competition, where the mechanism for competing actually involves disrupting the other individuals trying to capture the same resource. So my contention is that non zero sum dynamics do not result in an absence of competition, but they result in a kind of competition that is in general much more desirable. Having found a non zero sum opportunity, creatures tend to produce more creatures like themselves, which results in the exhaustion of that opportunity. So creatures are programmed therefore to find these opportunities and to capture them and squirrel them away by whatever mechanism is available. So that can be in the form of more mouths. If you think about individuals that find themselves in an abundant new landscape, they can produce a great many more individuals like themselves than they would under standard carrying capacity conditions. In human beings there is another possibility too, which has to do with consumption. So human beings can capture an opportunity and defend it by bringing it into production of some kind. And human beings do both things. The result of this for people has been the creation of what I call a throughput society. So if you think about what you know from economics, you will realize that we actually literally define economic growth as a state in which we are maximizing the rate at which we are converting useful energy into useless heat and converting precious resources into trash. If I invent a refrigerator that's just as efficient as the one you have and it lasts 10 times as long, that should be a good thing, right? Intuitively it makes sense that I'm making the world better by producing that refrigerator. But you'll note that it results in a whole lot fewer refrigerators being sold and that will register in economic models as a failure of growth. And we will wonder what we are doing wrong that the growth that used to accompany the repeated sale of refrigerators to the same people has stopped. I was making a little interesting economic point here, which I think is a very valid point. But I'd also like to focus on the fact that the refrigerator isn't just a means for keeping my food cold. There are, sorry, there are status elements to it. There are a whole lot of, I mean, this becomes a very, very complicated thing. And I think there's also a certain materialist layer to it that in terms of our psychology, materialism being the being the foundational. Element in a materialist secular society actually encourages this type of thing rather than prioritizing certain other values. And you'll find you'll find Christians talking about this and writing about this in other places. Now I want to jump. I want to jump into maybe I should pause this. So basically, Brett says that what happens is that human beings look for these non zero sum situations where we can grow, we can compete, we can take over new places, new resources, more mouths, more opportunity, more products. But then but then bottlenecks appear because they're sort of a cycle. We we break into this new this new realm and we colonize it and we take it over and we grow and we grow and we grow and we grow until we arrive at the carrying capacity of that new environment. And then bottlenecks begin to emerge and and he goes into he then goes into that. And again, I'll buy I don't know if I'm going to chop up this video or not. We'll see if you only find one video on the feed, you found the long one. We'll see if I do a short one. Here's a good example of a novelty effect that potentially has very serious consequences. This is the person who has fallen asleep at the wheel of the car. Now you will notice that you don't fall asleep walking around very often. But I bet you if I asked the audience how many people here have fallen asleep behind the wheel of a car, at least for a moment or two, most of you would say say yes if you drive. The reason for that is that there are no cars in your ancestral environment. And so the body does not correctly register that you're hurtling down the road at 60 miles an hour because really what you're doing is sitting in a chair, not experiencing the acceleration that goes along with, you know, starting up from a dead stop or going around a corner. And that can lull you to sleep. This is a result of you just not being prepared for cars and having to take special action, whether it's drinking coffee or pulling over or something like that. So bottlenecks are what happens when a population does not have the capacity to address the challenges that that it faces. And bottlenecks are not necessarily something that you get through, but every population should hope to get through whatever bottlenecks it faces. Now what's really interesting here, again, if you go back and look at the Vervecki stuff and you learn something about categories and what we're looking at, this Darwinian image of how things work is, again, if you read the Metaphysical Class, if you read the Metaphysical Club, categories don't persist necessarily. I mean, categories are sort of what we bring to things. But so what comes out is perhaps different from what went in. In other words, what we sort of do with this image of bottlenecks is we remain the viewer of it without really thinking that, well, if there's no observer, what in fact has gone through? And in fact, even the whole throughness of it, you really have to sort of try and think around this thing when you think about it. Now there's been much discussion of the fact that people are always saying that the world is ending. And you may hear me saying, oh, Fermi paradox, the world is ending. And people are always wrong about that. They have to have always been wrong. But we have been wrong about that. But again, you have to ask the question, who is we? But here's the question. Why do people always say that? I think there's a strong possibility people say that because bottlenecks have been very common and the world has ended again and again and again. Now pay attention to because as a pastor, someone gets the bad news of an accident or a death or a lost job or an affair, a betrayal. And someone will say, my world has ended. So pay attention to the frames here. And in fact, that's critical for thinking about these bottlenecks because what bottlenecks tend to are always framed in terms of the thing that we are paying attention to with respect to some transition. And what it does is it ends for populations and those populations that correctly understand when they are approaching a bottleneck and figure out how to address the issue go on to leave future populations. Okay. Now what he's just lined out in that is this whole rationality salvation narrative that is that is deeply within us. If I am on a sinking ship and there are lifeboats, I immediately see an opportunity. It's a salvation narrative to get myself off the sinking ship and onto a lifeboat. And then maybe I will be saved from the sinking ship by going on that lifeboat. There is there is built into this observation desire in terms of let's say a will to live a rational pathway by which we can go through it and then hopefully a desired outcome achieved. Now a little bit later, we're going to get into the question of climate change. This is dominating this conversation. Okay, it's dominating this conversation. This is this is this tends to be our our primary mode of salvation in the world as we see it right now. So those populations that don't figure it out or don't take the bottleneck seriously enough perish. And so if you think about the mythology that human beings pass along to each other as population level mythology rather than humanity level mythology, then you have to take the concept that the world is ending much more seriously than you would otherwise. The problem for us, though, is that our systems, the systems that keep us alive are so interconnected and so novel that it is likely that if we screw up that the entirety of humanity is going to blink out this time for the first time. That really hasn't been an issue until very recently. But the interconnectedness of all of our systems makes it an issue in the present. And of course, that is the big fear. That is that is what that is what we are afraid of. So if you watch the video, you'd see that that Brett or the long version of the video, you'd see that Brett talks about these these bottlenecks and these bottlenecks around the world. And so that's the big fear. So if you watch the video, you'd see that that Brett or the long version of the video, you'd see that Brett talks about these these bottlenecks and these bottlenecks arise. And if you watch the earlier part, you know, we fill up a space and these bottlenecks arrived. Now, these bottlenecks are frames. And Brett feels concerned that, well, let's say nuclear war or climate change or one of these things could could wipe out all of humanity, perhaps. But, you know, there have been bottlenecks before. We imagine the Neanderthal bottleneck, the the Denisovan bottleneck. There have been genocides. And every time a people group or a language goes, their world ends. Some of these genocides are by conflict, which are intentional. Some of the genocides, let's say of the Aboriginal peoples in the Americas, their entire way of life was was absorbed in a sense by by these other populations. And and this goes on and on and on and on throughout human history. This is in some ways just sort of the natural process of history. We might want to think because people groups, families, every time, you know, in a sense, a a family is a bottleneck and they go away. So, again, you've got to pay attention to the frames and all of what what we mean by we as we're thinking about these bottlenecks. And, of course, you know, this is this has gone on and on throughout human history. Now, what I want to play here is some of C.S. Lewis's life in an atomic age. I'm just going to do one long video. I don't know if I can do the short videos. Life in an atomic age, where Lewis talks about this, because in a sense, it's a funny thing that we get to these points and we're naturally we're alarmed. Naturally, we wish to address it. But what kind of world did we think we were living in? And let us begin by supposing that nature is all that exists. Let us suppose that nothing ever has existed or ever will exist except this meaningless play of atoms in space and time. And that by a series of a hundred chances, it has regrettably produced things like ourselves, conscious beings who now know that their own consciousness is an accidental result of the whole meaningless process. Though to us, alas, it feels significant. In this situation, there are, I think, three things one might do. You might commit suicide. Nature, which has blindly given me for my torment this consciousness, which demands meaning and value in a universe that offers neither, has luckily also given me the means of getting rid of it. I return the unwelcome gift. I will be fooled no longer. Secondly, you might decide simply to have as good a time as possible. The universe is a universe of nonsense. But since you're here, grab what you can. Unfortunately, there is on those terms so very little left to grab. Only the course is sensual pleasures. Oh, you can't be in love with a girl if you know that all the beauties of both her person and her character are a momentary and accidental pattern produced by the collision of atoms and that your own response to them is only a sort of psychic phosphorescence arising from the behavior of your genes. Or third, you may defy the universe. You may say, let the universe be irrational. I am not. Let it be merciless. I will have mercy by whatever curious chance it has produced me. Now that I'm here, I will live according to human values. Oh, I know the universe will win in the end. But what is that to me? I will go down fighting amid all this wastefulness. I will persevere amid all this competition. I will make sacrifices. Oh, be damned to the universe. I suppose that most of us, while we remain materialists, will adopt a position that alternates between the second and third attitude. The third is incomparably better and more likely to preserve civilization. But both shipwreck on the same rock. And that rock is that we will want to hold up our own standards against the idiocy of the universe. We will talk as if our own standards were something outside the universe. But if nature is the only thing in existence, then of course there can be no other source for our standards. Far from being a light from beyond nature, whereby nature can be judged, our human nature is only the way in which anthropoids of our species feel when the atoms under our own skulls get into certain states. Those states being produced by causes quite irrational and unhuman. Thus the very ground which we define nature crumbles under our feet. For most modern people, thoughts of this kind have to be gone through before the opposite view can get a fair hearing. All naturalism leads to a quite final and hopeless discord between what our minds claim to be and what they really must be if naturalism is true. They claim to be spirit, that is to be reason, perceiving universal intellectual principles and moral laws and possessing free will. But if naturalism is true, our minds must in reality be merely arrangements of atoms and skulls. We never think a thought because it is true, only because blind nature forces us to think it. We never do an act because it is right, only because blind nature forces us to do it. It is when one has faced this preposterous conclusion that one is at last ready to listen to the voice that whispers. But suppose we really are spirits. Suppose we are not the offspring of nature. Well, we'll leave Lewis there. That was a reading from Lewis's Life in an Atomic Age and he says, well, you know, bottlenecks, we've always known there are bottlenecks. Each of us has a bottleneck. That's the death. And none of us are, well, we're in denial about our death, but we all know it's going to come. And our families are in bottlenecks. And in fact, the world is just one bottleneck after another. That's how the world is. But then how do we grapple with this reality that is simply too large? Well, what we do, and this is, I think, part of the real helpfulness of what Peterson brought in his first biblical lecture, is we do it with story. And in fact, the we that we talk about, the African gorillas, they're not anxious about their extinction as a group. The chimpanzees are not anxious about their extinction as a group. Kids are banging against the wall. The children are not anxious about their extinction as a group when they're beneath a certain age. The reality is simply too large. We're anxious about things that are close to us. We're anxious about things that are dear to us. We're terrified about losing what we want. But what we do is that we create art. And art, in fact, is the means by which it's the machine code of our relevance realization. The question still remains, where does the information in dreams come from? And I think where it comes from is that we watch the patterns that everyone acts out. We've watched that forever, and we've got some representations of those patterns. That's part of our cultural history. That's what's embedded in stories, in fictional accounts of the story between good and evil, the bad guy and the good guy, and the romance. These are canonical patterns of being for people, and they deeply affect us because they represent what it is that we will act out in the world. And then we flesh that out with the individual information we have about ourselves and other people. So it's like there's waves of behavioral patterns that manifest themselves in the crowd across time. Great dramas are played on the crowd across time. And the artists watch that, and they get intimations of what that is, and they write it down and they tell us, and then we're a little clearer about what we're up to. Like a great dramatist like Shakespeare, let's say, we know that what he wrote is fiction, and then we say, well, fiction isn't true. But then you think, well, wait a minute, maybe it's true like numbers are true. Numbers are an abstraction from the underlying reality, but no one in their right mind would really think numbers aren't true. You could even make a case that the numbers are more real than the things that they represent, right? Because the abstraction is so insanely powerful. Once you have mathematics, you're just deadly. You can move the world with mathematics. And so it's not obvious that the abstraction is less real than the more concrete reality. And you take a work of fiction like Hamlet and you think, well, is that it's not true because it's fiction. But then you think, wait a minute, what kind of explanation is that? Maybe it's more true than nonfiction because it takes what the story that needs to be told about you and the story that needs to be told about you and you and you and you and it abstracts that out and says, look, here's something that's a key part of the human experience as such. Right? So it's an abstraction from this underlying noisy substrate. And people are affected by it because they see that the thing that's represented is part of the pattern of their being. That's the right way to think about it. And then with these old stories, these ancient stories, it seems to me like that process has been occurring for thousands of years. It's like we watched ourselves and we extracted out some stories. We imitated each other and we represented that in drama. And then we distilled the drama and we got a representation of the distillation. And then we did it again. And at the end of that process, it took God only knows how long. I think some of these stories. And now it's important to note at this point that this process he's talking about is not done by a committee that say, well, we're going to have to do this. This is something that we are doing, not recognizing what we're doing. We're just doing it as we do it. And there might be motivations and things in our minds and agendas going on. And in fact, those genders might not be anything like what is coming out and what is speaking to previous generations. One of the things that I enjoy doing sometimes is looking at the history of biblical interpretation because you can look at one little story and you can see how all these different generations interpret it differently. Now, sometimes people listen to that and they say, well, clearly there it can't be the word of God because people are interpreting it differently. But it's like, do you think that God would be more dim than we are and not understanding contextualization and how these stories work? And in fact, stories that work over many, many cultures horizontally and many, many cultures temporally, vertically and a book that deals with all of these cultures. Now, so we put this into art. And so now I want to talk about these movies, but I don't want to talk about Two Tales of Two Sons. Now, I talked about the Joker movie in a previous video. And again, there are issues with the sound in that video. So I wanted to do another video, but I can never do the same video twice because I'm just not anywhere near that organized. And for me, every video I do is a video of today. And I get bored with doing things, my videos of yesterday. So I just always make new videos. So I saw in the theater Joker and I also saw in the theater Ad Astra because I saw a little Ad Astra. Look at, you know, 84 percent from the critics. I didn't see the 40 percent from the crowds. But and so I saw these. These are the two. I got a movie pass at my local theater. So because I'm cheap and movies cost so much and, you know, this is a fun thing that I can do with my wife. And so we saw these two movies. And after seeing Ad Astra, I said, this movie is very much parallel to the Joker, to the Joker movie. And there's a lot that you can learn by watching both movies and understanding what is coming up out of the movie creators. Now, I've been watching a bunch of different commentaries and and reviews of the Joker and the I forget the red haired guy. Computer or something or other that popped up on my Google feed. And I know that he converted to Christianity. So that's a little higher in my salient. So I listened to the video and he talked about this black pill review of it. And and basically that they're saying that, well, you know, these these the Joker movie is just a way to get people who are hostile to the to the the woke religion in America to have them feel vindicated. And what they complained about in both of these movies is that basically it's a fake. It's Hollywood pulling the pulling the, you know, pulling the wool over from getting my metaphors right. You know, the Hollywood, you know, doing a fast one on people who are critics of of woke culture. And because, of course, you know, it's a anyway. And you know, there's a lot of, you know, I appreciated both of these videos that I saw here. And and yeah, there's a ton of tracking between Taxi Driver and King of Comedy and Joker and many, many critics have brought that out. And some people say, well, this was supposed to incite violence among, you know, the the anti Antifa crowd or the, you know, the right wing or the alt right or whatever. Social construction you want to place on this and and or it's supposed to just pacify people by by making them feel that Hollywood is hearing them. And what this really gets into, I think, at the heart of their of their critique, although they didn't say any of this is is this dynamic of what I call vicarious visual atonement that, you know, let's say you're you're you lean more to the right in the culture. And you're getting annoyed by the political correctness and the identity politics. And you go to see the Joker movie and you're like, yeah, this is, you know, sticking it to the man. And oh, OK. But, you know, then you leave the theater and you go and live just like everybody else. So you and your Antifa neighbor, you know, they might say that this movie is terrible and you might say that this movie is great. But, you know, you're both using Apple products and consuming and and racing towards the consumeristic bottleneck. So it's it's this it's this vicarious visual atonement dynamic that we have in our culture. We view a representation, we register internal agreement with that red representation or we we say, you know, credo. I believe in this representation. I align myself with the Joker movie. I align myself against the Joker movie. But then you go and you live the same way in any case. And and our agreement with that representation then affords us a status with the divine or with the principality qualifying us as a good person or saved. And so maybe you're not supernatural. You have no supernatural ideas and you're a secularist. But now you're on the right side of history. So you in fact have this great principality framework that that you are trying to negotiate yourself up a moral status hierarchy and feel good about yourself. Because at least you're not like your Antifa neighbor. And this is a game we play. And this is this is, in fact, a very old religious game. It's a religious game that that Jesus calls out the book of James calls out. But and it's I think in very many ways, it's a deeply Protestant move. It's sort of a consequence of of losers of Luther's revolution that that somehow belief and and participation in different different culture wars. Teams or principalities and powers becomes a very psychological thing. But in the end, everybody is sitting in the theater looking at screens or sitting at home looking at screens. And, you know, so what of what happens? You know, I agree with the movie Joker. I'm against the movie Joker. The movie Joker is a fast one being being pulled over our eyes. And round and round we go. And and we see this in the political process. I'm anti racist because I identify as a Democrat whose archetype is kindness. And so I'm kind because I identify with kind and don't actually have to be kind to people. In fact, I might be kind of a jerk. But as long as I'm a Democrat, I derive social status from mentally associating myself with that tribe and that administration. And the same goes on the other side. I'm pro I'm pro God and country because I identify as a Republican whose archetype is strength. And and therefore I'm a good person because I always vote for the right person once a year. The only difference between me and my neighbor is I go into that voting booth and I I circle in that one box and therefore I participate in the hierarchy and I'm a good person. Now people very quickly jump and say, ah, that's all psychological. And with something in this material world, what we want to do is we want to do something that's not just a political thing. In this material world, what we really need to do is we really need to affect change. So it's not good enough to just identify with a movie or or whatever you you have to go out and you have to do things because facts are not enough. And we must go out and not simply identify or decry, but we must act and do things in order for things to happen. But now I want to look at both of these movies because I think there's a lot between these movies and these movies both get get into. Well, I think the the the Brad Pitt movie is just a classic example of American religion. Now, I think in many ways, the movie theaters are the churches of America. And now you can be bedside Baptist with Netflix and and Amazon and Apple and all the different streaming objects that are going to that are going to be coming after us. So but but these two movies, I think, are deeply religious in what they are promoting. And I think in many ways we use this visceral this what I what I call this vicarious visual atonement to align ourselves with with different religions mentally in America. And so our our self identity and the little narrative of our head is characterized by how we align with these things. So Ad Astra, I think, is a is your standard American religious salvation movie. Now, there's these movies actually have a great deal in common. Both of these are grown men who have been abandoned by their fathers. They were both raised by single mothers and neither of them can successfully maintain a stable relationship with a woman. Both of them will kill. So it's the violence angle I want to get at in this video. Both of them will kill in pursuit of their goal. But as I mentioned before, in the American ethos, it's not so much killing or not killing that that we look at in terms of our moral status. It is the reasons why we kill or the reasons we don't kill that that qualify us for moral status or or delegitimate us and make us a bad person. And the goal for both of them is is self realization. Now, there's lots of other aspects to both of these movies, but I don't want to spend too too much time on them. I could go through both movies. And again, if you see both movies, line them up and look at the worlds that that they are communicating. Now, again, do both of these movie makers have their own agendas? Sure. But you know what? So often we say much more than we are visually commanding with our agendas to try and communicate a specific message or move a crowd in a certain way. So, Ad Astra is very much an American story. This is an American movie and it's a movie that most of you have seen how many countless times. Now, one of the things that I didn't notice when I saw the movie, but I noticed when I was setting up these slides is that the the subtitle here is the answers we seek are just outside our reach. This is I mean, that's a skeptical. That's a skeptical message. And it's and it's very much affirms the secular skeptical frame. And so this drama is going to is going to basically be framed within the solar system. And in fact, all of the movements are going to be within the solar system. And we're going to try and go out to the edge of the solar system to try and see if there's someone out there to see if maybe God is out there or the usual contemporary stand in for materialists of God. Aliens. So the hero Roy McBride and what we know naturally do in these movies and you learn a lot about moviemaking by not only listening to Jonathan Pigeot, but the half in the bag guys and some of those guys who've done the Mr. Plinkett on the Star Wars movie or probably the you know, which are probably the most religious movies that we have in America today. So the hero we identify with the hero. Oh, it's a it's a it's a white guy, but it's a beautiful white guy. It's it's it's Brad Pitt now in his in middle age and you know, with now with the wisdom and maturity and the and the depth now not the young Brad Pitt, but the middle aged Brad Pitt. And and in this movie, he's a he's a cool character. He's the movie begins where he's falling from a space antenna and he falls, you know, a terror inducing moment. And in his debriefing, someone says, Is it true that your pulse never goes above 80? They have all these little psychological check ins and he's and according to the psychological programming of the day, he's always steady state. He's always his pulse never rises. And and he's got this he's got this hot wife, Liv Tyler. I quipped to my wife that, you know, poor Aragorn's wife, she, you know, the elf, the elf princess lives on and on has to go from one guy to the next. So now she's in the future with with Brad Pitt. And but but you notice in this, you know, a lot of future movies have a dystopian future. But no, apparently on this earth, all the ecological things have been solved. And and earth is this this lovely mixture of all these green pastures and beautiful cities. And I mean, every everything is wonderful. So the focus is not on, you know, post, you know, a modern contemporary lifestyle, everything that's not where the focus is or the attention is. Everything on earth is fine on the surface. Now, technology is a deep, deep theme in this movie. On the surface, technology has made good on all of its offerings for the most part. But of course, there will be a crisis. Now, now, now, Brad Pitt is is a hero's hero and he always wins his battles and he's been through wars and he's been through fire and he's been through rain. And and but and so all of that maturity is on him. And when everybody else is freaking out, you know, Brad's always going to win the fight and always Brad is always going to come out on top. And that's the kind of person he is. But remember, he's been abandoned by his father. And so then we begin to see the problem. The movie opens up, his wife leaves him in disgust. And it's like, well, how could you leave a hero like this man? Oh, he's a workaholic and he he's always working and he inherited this from his hero father, who was way more of a workaholic, who who went out into outer space to do what? To find if there's other life out there. He wants to get outside of the secular box. And then we learn about this man that even though he passes all of his psychological evaluations, he's dead inside. He has no feeling because, of course, in our religious matrix, feeling is the highest good we can arrive at. Feeling is the experience is all we can have within the iron box of secularism. Now, space travel is is dead outside and you have people who who are dead inside flying out to places who are dead outside. And then we learn about the tyranny of this of this space agency that is sort of controlling people and not loyal to people and telling lies. And so then we have, you know, our contemporary skepticism about institutions and about cultures and is his famous father who was a hero. Well, well, maybe not so much of a hero. And it was propaganda because that's what the space agency had to do to to, you know, keep all the money going. They couldn't tell the truth about the father who who they basically left marooned at the edge of the solar system, which is also the bottom of the sea out in Neptune, this big blue planet that the furthest away in the in the solar system. And and now there's something technologically happening on that ship that is threatening all of life on Earth. And so his mission is to save his father from the deep. And and so he's going to go to Neptune, deep space. And his father's looking for promised life in the cosmos. His father is looking for the aliens and the and the gods who are out deep in space. And now he must save himself. Brad Pitt must from the from the dead inside, because again, he's a flatliner. His his his heartbeat stays in this narrow bandwidth. And and he's and he's got to get the girl. I mean, this is all classic Joseph Campbell. But along the way, there will be challenges and he must kill. And and again, as is typical for American movies, all the other soldiers that accompany him, they all fall to the wayside. But but Brad is able to overcome all of his adversaries. And and yeah, he will kill in the process. And and some of these killings aren't you know, our gray areas are questionable. He's a reluctant killer. But his killings are his killings justifiable. He has a line in the movie that says, I'll leave it to history to judge. You know, that's that's now the big judge that's in the stand in for God. We no longer have a judging God. We have history to judge us. Oh, history. So and then there's, you know, a little bit of spoilers here. The death of his father. Well, we don't see him die, we presume. But, you know, he doesn't he cannot secure his father. He cannot rescue his father. His his father is too far gone. This this man who's a man of science and in a sense, religion at the edge of the solar system looking for life. But then the end of the movie, he you know, he realizes more better than his father realized because his father collected all this data from all these other planets that were beautiful to look at. And he says something to the effect that he was so busy looking for life out there, he didn't see the dead beauty of the other dead planets. And if he could only reinterpret what he's seeing, then he would have life inside brought to him by beauty. And then he comes back to Earth and its mission accomplished. And he actually by giving you these spoilers and probably making the movie better for you. He stops his father's obsolete space technology that is threatening the earth. And there's a resurrection scene. There's a resurrection scene in in in Joker as well. There's a resurrection scene when he emerges from the space capsule. It's a rebirth. It's a it's he's now going to live a new life. And now he becomes alive inside his heartbeat can go up and down his heartbeat went up in the journey. And he started failing his psychological profile. And now he has feelings and he has feelings that he's alive. And the last I think it was the last clip of the movie. The movie begins with her leaving and the movie ends with her coming back. Classic American because romance read. Do I have the book here? Read Beckett's you know on on on the romantic without a God. Romance now becomes our God. And so the height of his the height of his rebirth is the resurrection of the love with his wife. Because that is the that is the greatest thing you can hope for in this life is that kind of love. That's classic American. And then they live happily ever after. And I think the audience sort of yawns. The messages are clear. We can succeed within our little secular box here within our little solar system. There's no life out there. We can find love and feelings and experiences of enough to be happy. And the path of his father is is foolish and hurtful. But but Brad overcomes it all. So so follow your American religious script. Stay in the box. Find meaning and experience and emotion and have all of those experiences that you can have. Because it's alive inside of us for a little while and then it's dead out there because the universe is finally it's all dead out there. The answers we seek are just outside our search. We'll never know. So the best you can do is get your heart read up and and maybe defy the the the psychological evaluation program and have the love of your life. Now this is very different from Joker. Joker is the antihero's journey. And remember as I said before there's no Batman in this movie. There's no hero in this movie. We have Arthur Fleck and he's adopted by an unfit single mother. Now here's the thing. How many Brad Pitts are are there out there in this world? And how many Arthur Flecks are there in this world? He's he's adopted by an unfit single mother and he's abused by his mother's lovers and and his mother fed him fantasies fantasies about how he's going to bring happiness to the world. Actually you can watch some of the trailers and get this whole movie. It's they lay the whole thing out and you're going to bring happiness to the skirt. You're going to bring a smile to this world and and you're going to do great things. And so we're set up by Ad Astra. And this is the the mother is feeding on American religion and he's feeding upon it. Maybe if he gets a girl that will save him. But but can he have the girl? Can he rescue his father? He's going to try to rescue his father in this movie. Doesn't go so good. And how many Roy McBrides and how many Arthur Flecks are there? Is Roy McBride story? Is Roy McBride a story that crazy mom tells? That's the story crazy mom lives within. In other words, Joker deconstructs Ad Astra. And Joker's world as I said in my previous video, you know, I said, boy, this looks like the world I grew up in. And then I saw this video with with Todd Phillips talking about the filming of it and bang, he filled it in Newark today. And like I said, you know, New York has gone glitzy and gentrified and all of that money. But Newark and Patterson and all of those cities outside. Now they've they've they've they've been they've been decaying. They've been decaying since the 50s, baby. And they didn't U-turn like Manhattan and Brooklyn and all those lovely places in New York or some of the strips right along the river. He filmed it in Newark. And I laughed so hard when I heard that. And now now pay attention in Ad Astra. The world is now green and lush. And the only thing threatening is this technology from the father that's sending these that's sending these energy pulses that are somehow devastating everything on Earth and all of humanity and putting humanity at risk. And it's a bottleneck. And so Brad Pitt has to save the world. Well, Arthur Fleck is living in Newark. He's living in New York. He's living in New York and he's he's, you know, trying to make his way in this world being a clown. And it isn't going well. And in this movies, there's there's no good guys. There's there's only bad guys and just shades of gray. Some people trying to help, but they're all compromised. And the killings in this movie now. When I saw this movie, the Bernie gets episode that you can look up on the net in 1984, the subway vigilante, this 84 was, you know, sort of the end of the 70s in New York City. And it wasn't the full gentrification process that you see in Friends and Seinfeld and Sex and the City hadn't really come all the way through. OK. OK. And so Bernie gets and his gunning of of four black men in the subway, you know, caused a lot of caused a lot of conversation in the New York area. So I was I was in college that year, but I'd be back and forth to New Jersey, back and forth on summers. And so this was always in the news and all of this conversation. Is it you know, is it right that he shot these guys in this this this move, this scene in The Joker of him shooting the the Wall Street boys as they're as they're harassing a woman. And as in most American hero stories, you only kill if you must for some noble reason in pursuit of some some saving goal. And that's what that's what Brad Pitt does. That's what Roy Roy McBride does. But the Joker starts out that way. But but soon he realizes that killing brings him to life. He's a natural born killer. There's there's a thrill in it. He loves it. And again, watch the watch the watch the trailers. He's he's invisible. He's a nobody until he starts killing and and he's unseen and still he starts killing. So now he goes around the city and there's all these posters and all these news articles. And you know, he's going to want to at some point reveal himself and say, I did this. See me. I'm invisible. How many Brad Pits are there in the world that everyone applauses and and and they make the walls of of great corporations and agencies. And how many invisible people are there? Which story is is really more true to life for people? Now, in both cases, you have your future through violence. And I think that's something that's something deep within us that that there's, you know, the corrupt institutions must be destroyed. Well, what is beyond their destruction, though, that the inequality is the charge. But is equal is equality an achievable goal? Are Roy McBride is Roy McBride equal to Arthur Fleck? I mean, even if you. Eliminated, you know, it's been very interesting because both. Rusty Rock, I can't remember his name, the comedian that that that interview Jordan Peterson, it'll it'll bubble up and rationality rules. They, you know, they both came away from Joker and said, I see what we must do is be kind to all of our people because they, you know, the village that rejects the sun is is burned down by the sun. Rationality rules use this proverb for that. But yeah, what the movie says is, can we really not reject these children? Isn't the script that we play say we must reject Arthur Fleck because isn't he one of the bad guys? And again, in fact, in Joker, there are no good guys. Now, again, you might say, well, well, maybe Todd Phillips is trying to do a number on us by giving us hope. Well, there's a lot built into this. And and whatever his intentions are, the movie is the movie. And I'll tell you, anybody who writes anything or produces something or preaches a sermon will very quickly notice that the message people take away are not so much the message that that the creator is trying to send. But it's the message that they create from the creation. And that's what drives this ongoing process that that Peterson is talking about. So we have this quest for equality. Or are we facing a bottleneck? And so, again, watch the first part of Peterson's Maps of Meaning 2017. Why did he write this book? He wrote this book because, well, these are two different ways that two different societies are are looking to address inequality. But go back to the go back to the the Teal Weinstein conversation. Do the Russians really address inequality? Well, well, maybe, Eric says, if people like my parents were in charge and Teal says, yeah, they'll never be in charge. Or I would take it one step further. Maybe that's the way they started. But maybe being in charge made them the creatures that they would be. Now, I want to go to a rationality rules video because all these things line up with this bottleneck of climate change. And I know, you know, four, six of Americans don't believe it. And I know a good number of you out there don't believe in climate change. I'm not trying to convince you one way or another. That's not the intent of this. So you can argue it in the comments section if you want to go right ahead. But but what I want us to see are the salvation narratives within the film and within the culture and and and how those salvation narratives were created and whether or not they work. And so rationality rules. Oh, I didn't put the link in. I love this video. Not just it's a really cool video. But what's so amazing about this video is that he undermines his worldview by making this video because his worldview is built on rationality. And he he makes the point compellingly that psychology trumps rationality. Well, what do you do then if you embrace the premise and you embrace society must be preserved? How do you deal with that? Where do you go with this? Now, the thesis of this video is we have to keep talking. But anybody will notice that while talking is now what we default to when we realize that our plan A, which is bombarding everyone with rationality, doesn't work. So so let's let him do a little bit of talking and then he's going to get into some very interesting stuff. And a reply to this might be, yes, but bro, Siv, the truly poor won't have a long run if they invest in green energy. And then a reply to this might be, bro, seriously, my dad would be the absolute crap out of your dad. You stole my childhood. But the underlining very serious problem here is that we don't have time to test this hypothesis. We only have one world. OK, we're at a bottleneck. Now, we only have one world. OK, that's your frame. You're you're a secular materialist. This is what you believe. So this is a serious bottleneck for you. The apocalyptic claim of the world ending in 12 years is no doubt ridiculous. But if our data and interpretations are correct, that is, if the vast majority of our scientists are correct, another 12 years of apathy may just push us beyond a safe return. Now, what's interesting about this is that part of what makes this issue part of what makes this issue a defeater, the death of modernist rationalism, is because you have all of your things that are supposed to win the day on your side. You have 97 percent of scientists. Where else do we have that? You have most of the media lined up with you. You have all of the tools of modernist propaganda moving for you and they keep making the plea. But then you also have psychology, which when you get there, you begin to realize we can't win this battle with our political tools. We can't win this battle with the things that are supposed to save us. So what do we do? We do have to take this very seriously. And at the moment, most of us don't. That's so that's so blind. Most of us don't. Moving on, a third criticism that's given by many critics is that many climate activists are hypocritical. Ah, hypocrisy. And often insufferably so. Lambasting the youth of the world for lassoing themselves to these protest marches and Greta and so on. And then immediately going back to their laptops, their iPads, their iPhones, their air conditioned school rooms, their bathrooms, and so on and so on. Their mums take them to school in nice gas guzzling cars. In other words, many critics see many activists talking a good game. But when push comes to shove, the activists themselves don't even practice the principles they're trying to force upon others. To illustrate this, take, for example, the following clip from Earthling Ed's channel. Ed is a vegan activist, and he recently attended a climate change protest in London to encourage climate activists to go vegan. He began by asking them how they can reduce their emissions. Name some ways that we can reduce emissions. Well that's for the government, you know, we're just here to protest, they've got a site, it's all... And after a bit of back and forth, the activists gave some great responses, such as cutting subsidies for fossil fuels. Electric cars. Plastic. Yeah. I always love how electric cars come into this. Electric cars and reducing plastic, and it's like, does what you put into the car count? Anyway, here comes the big moment. Woo! Jump nature! Jump from charity shops. There we go. Secondhand clothing. Secondhand clothing, what else? Turn the lights on. What about what we eat? Go vegan. Just kidding. All the kids know the right things to say. I love meat. I can never, I love food. Nah, I love the environment, but I don't love the environment that much. Ed then went on to explain, with more patience than a few civilisations, that if one wants to reduce their carbon footprint, then a surefire way of doing so is to reduce one's consumption of animal products. But the activist's response was as indifferent as many critics are to foregoing fossil fuels. Do you think the taste of something is worth the destruction it causes? Yeah, I'll be dead one day. So why are you here? To hear that. We're on our way to Subway actually. To do a vegan sandwich in Subway? Yeah, but it's not as good as the steak and cheese. What about the environmental impact? Well, the steak and cheese is already there, so I mean, me not eating it isn't going to stop them. But so is the plastic in the shelves and the diesel in the car. Now it's important to note, as Ed himself did, that one doesn't need to be vegan to care about the environment. That would be a form of purity testing, or no true Scotsman. However, the attitude of these activists is hypocritical. They couldn't come across as more disingenuous if they wanted to. And when you're in Subway, try the vegan sandwich. You never know. You never know. I will not do that, but thank you for the suggestion. Well, the environment is crying over that decision. See you later, guys. If you ever meet the environment, tell them I'm really sorry. I'm sorry. I love meat. The environment is crying over that decision. The environment is crying over that suggestion. What have they done to the environment? If you ever meet the environment, this young man is very rational in terms of what he is doing. He's very rational. He likes meat, and so he's going to eat meat. Now, foundational beliefs and presuppositions eventually express themselves. His post-life null, which is basically what the culture has been telling him, that you don't have to worry about having a... Remember the line that I talked about, right? There's this line that the more I talk over theist, non-theist, I keep trying to get to higher and higher resolution over this line. One of these things is there's no post-life consequence for this life action. For you. Well, but you ought to care about the people who come behind you, your children or grandchildren. Well, I'm going to be pro-environmental by not having children. Therefore, I don't have to care about other people's children and the kind of world I lead to them. See, what happens is that his post-life null will mean that even if he can make a difference, it won't matter. Because you've already ruled out after-life consequentialism, remember? And so what's really interesting is that it's like, why should I care if I don't... Before I came into consciousness, people did stuff and I might be annoyed because of the consequences of what they did. Why should I care after I'm out of consciousness? I will not suffer one bit for my decision to care nothing for the environment, to get the moral status by going to the protest and then just doing as I please. I'll be dead one day. Now, one of the things that I love about C.S. Lewis's Abolition of Man is he gets into this. At this point, because you have to ask the question, well, why should he care? And C.S. Lewis is talking about innovators versus people who believe in traditional morality. At this point, the innovator may ask why, after all, selfishness should be more rational or intelligent than altruism. The question is welcome. If by reason we mean the process actually employed by Gaius and Titius, these were these textbook writers that basically said that the experience we have does not connect with anything outside. In other words, the waterfall is pretty. It's not sublime. There isn't some essence in the waterfall that I am able to pick up. I am only having an emotional experience to the stuff out there in the world. If by reason we mean the process actually employed by Gaius and Titius when engaged in debunking, that is connecting by inference of propositions ultimately derived from some sense data with further propositions, then the answer must be that a refusal to sacrifice oneself is no more rational than a consent to do so and no less rational. Rationality rules is asking for non-rationality from this person, and this person is representative of a whole bunch of people. Rationality can have no grasp on that young man. Neither choice is rational or irrational at all. From propositions about fact alone, no practical conclusion can ever be drawn. This will preserve society, cannot lead to do this, except by the mediation of society ought to be preserved. This will cost you your life, cannot lead directly to do not do this. It can lead to it only through a felt desire or acknowledged duty of self-preservation. The innovator is trying to get a conclusion in the imperative mood out of premises in the indicative mood. And though he continues trying to all eternity, he cannot succeed, for the thing is impossible. We must therefore either extend the word reason to include what our ancestors called practical reason and confess that judgment such as society ought to be preserved, though they can support themselves by no reason of the sort that Gaius and Titus demand, are not merely sentiments but our rationality itself, or else we must give up at once and forever the attempt to find the core of rational value behind all the sentiments we have debunked. The innovator will not have the first alternative, for practical principles known to all men by reason are simply the Tao which he has set out to supersede and by the Tao C.S. Lewis means traditional morality. He is more likely to give up the quest for a rational core and to hunt for some other ground even more basic or realistic. In other words, what they're trying to give to this young man is a reason why society ought to be preserved and he's saying, I'll be dead one day, screw it, you don't have any reason you can give me. Now, now, Dilla-Hunty, of course, when his talk with Jordan Peterson will come up and say, I inherited self-preservation from my ancestors. It's an instinct. It's basic. Well, Lewis, many years before Dilla-Hunty gives this answer to Peterson, anticipates this answer. This he will probably feel that he has found an instinct, capital I. The preservation of society and of the species itself are ends that do not hang on the precarious threads of reason. They are given by instinct. That is why there is no need to argue against a man who does not acknowledge them. We have an instinctive urge to preserve our own species. That is why men ought to work for prosperity. We have no instinctive urge to keep promises or to respect individual life. That is why scruples of justice and humanity, in fact, the Tao, can be properly swept away when they conflict with our real end, the preservation of the species or the preservation of the kind of society that we think we should preserve. That, again, is why modern situations permit and demand a new sexual morality. The old taboos serve some real purpose in helping to preserve the species, but contraceptives have modified this, and we can now abandon many of the taboos. For, of course, sexual desire, being instinctive, is to be gratified. Whenever it does not conflict with the preservation of the species. In other words, there is a hierarchy. Yeah, but is there? Is the hierarchy an instinct? It looks, in fact, as if ethics based on instinct will give the innovator all he wants, and nothing of what he does not want. But why ought we obey instinct? There is another inst- is there another instinct of a higher order directing us to do so? In other words, you've got ought and instinct. You say, well, people obey instinct. That's one thing. But to say we ought to obey instinct is a very different question. Is there another instinct of a higher order directing us to do so and a third of a still higher order directing us to obey it? An infinite regress of instincts? This is presumably impossible, but nothing else will serve. From the statements about psychological fact, I have an impulse to do so and so, we cannot by any ingenuity derive the practical principle, I ought to obey the impulse. Even if it were true that men had spontaneous, unreflective impulse to sacrifice their own lives, or their own diets for the preservation of their fellows, it remains quite a separate question whether this is an impulse that they should control or one they should indulge. For even the innovator admits that many impulses, those which conflict with the preservation of the species, have to be controlled. That is what they are telling this young man. Well, and this admission surely introduces us to yet a more fundamental difficulty. Telling us to obey instinct is like telling us to obey people. People say different things, so do instincts. Our instincts are at war. If it is held that the instinct for preservation, for preserving the species should always be obeyed at the expense of other instincts, whence do we derive this rule of precedent? We have instincts, well, they might for me line up in a hierarchy they have for this young man, but where do you get an ought to impose your hierarchy on his? To listen to that instinct speaking in its own cause and deciding it in its own favor would be rather simple minded. Each instinct, if you listen to it, will claim to be gratified at the expense of all the others. And this is where you have action coming as, well, action expresses instinct, which instinct is most salient to him in the moment. By the very act of listening, one listening to one rather than to others, we have already prejudiced the case. If we did not bring to the examination of our instincts a knowledge of their comparative dignity, we could never learn it from them. And that knowledge cannot itself be instinctive. The judge cannot be one of the parties judged, or if he is, the decision is worthless and there is no ground for placing the preservation of the species above self-preservation or sexual appetite or a desire to eat a meat sandwich at Subway. See, the instinct to eat meat and the instinct to improve your status through public moral performance seem to be higher than him for the instinct that society ought to be preserved. And this is in fact what we run into all the time. Self-preservation or this idea that society ought to be preserved. But again, we have the category issue in terms of, well, what is society and what society do I actually participate in? And this, of course, we see very clearly in the Roman Empire. I'm reading Tom Holland's book, Dynasty, on the Roman Empire right now and the book is just simply brimming with illustrations of humanity. Conquering your neighbors was your chief preoccupation. So it was said of Romulus, fighting foreigners not themselves. Now the Romans taxed their conquered people. If you were a Roman, you didn't get taxed. Wouldn't you like that as a policy of your government? In a sense, that's sort of like, well, not really like trade tariffs because that's another way of sort of taxing ourselves. Anyway, fighting foreigners not themselves. This everyone could agree, everyone who was not a foreigner obviously in Rome, was the proper business of the Roman people. Naturally, in war as in peace, it was essential to respect legal niceties. Unprovoked aggression, while only to be expected from wild beasts and barbarians categories, was behavior inappropriate to a civilized people. Kiwitas, city, citizen, it all comes together. So it has always been. When Romulus attacked his neighbors, it had been with the resolve never to tolerate disrespect. Retribution for insult or injury had always been swift. That's very much an instinct. One king, ambushed and routed after presuming to raid Roman territory had to be cut down by Romulus himself. Here in his slaying of a general by his opposite number had been an exploit fit to illumine the succeeding ages. What more glorious feat of single combat could possibly be envisioned? Isn't this Roy McBride making his way out to save the world and maybe rescue his father if he can be saved? What more glorious feat of single combat could possibly be envisioned? Romulus, after stripping the blood soaked armor from his foe, had borne it proudly back to Rome. There is only one God, lowercase g, worthy to receive the dedication of such a prize, Jupiter, the king of the gods himself. Hung at first from the branches of a sacred oak, the spoils of honor had subsequently been moved into a temple custom built for that purpose, the very first to be consecrated in the city. Here, Romulus had decreed, was where in days to come anyone who emulates me by killing a general or a king with his own hands, now Augustus really isn't up to that task, with his own hands shall lay the stripped arms, the spoils of honor. This is human nature my friends. This is human nature. Now, what we have however, in Christianity, is the birth of healthy self-criticism. Oh nuts, I didn't put the clip in. Hang on, I'll go get it. That's the Holy Spirit. And the Holy Spirit, it's fascinating because the Holy Spirit is opposed to Satan, of course, it's the Spirit of God. And the Greek word for Holy Spirit is Parakletos, you know, the Paraklet. And the word Parakletos in a Greek tribunal of the time is simply the lawyer for the defense. Satan is the accuser of the mythical victim, and the Holy Spirit is the one who tells you this victim is innocent, which is what the Gospels do. The Gospels do it for Jesus, and it's especially true for Jesus, but it's also true of all mythical victims. The death of Jesus is the birth of the Holy Spirit, the Paraklet, the lawyer for the defense. And as the defender of victims, the Holy Spirit in effect accuses the accuser. It introduces into history a new spirit of self-criticism. Why do you notice the moat in your brother's eye, Jesus asked in the Sermon on the Mount, when there is a beam in your own eye? Now take a look at the dynamics of the climate change. It's an accusation. We're going to win this by accusing. We're going to win this by convicting. We're going to win this in this way. Now in Christianity, the Holy Spirit is the one that motivates from within to in fact preserve society, to love your neighbor all the way up to and including your enemy. And Paul in his letter to the Romans says, You have no excuse, O man, when you judge another, for in passing judgment on him you condemn yourself, since you, the judge, are doing the very same things. This self-critical spirit, Gerard says, will transform the world. Christians too will become accusers and persecutors, but they will never be free of the constantly repeated call to examine themselves and reform. We are the one society in the world which has that vocation for self-criticism. We never leave well enough alone. And the circle is never ending. The first embodiment of Christianity, okay, you have Constantine and so forth, you denounce it. And then the Inquisition and so forth. Then you have the Renaissance and the Reformation. And the Reformation say, we are going to be that perfect church that the Catholics were not able to be. But after a few centuries, they become the same. But it doesn't stop there. They will be criticized too. And then they all survive together. They become a horrible big mess. But the spirit of that critique is always more powerful than the institution. And what we must purify is that critique. And it must not be a violent critique, because that critique embodies part of the same violence. It's always in the same circle of violence. You see, for instance, today, we constantly criticize ourselves, and rightly so. But if you try to say to people, from what point of view do you criticize? From what point of view are you entitled to say, this is bad? When Voltaire wrote Candide, he wanted a perfect society as a backdrop. He couldn't find one. He had to invent one. He wrote a letter at the same time saying, our society is like a siren. It's a beautiful woman on top, and it's an ugly fish, tail of a fish. You know, we are double. We are both the best and the worst. So ultimately, the critique has to be criticized. And the critique of the critique has to be criticized too. In other words, we have to see that whatever you do, O man who judge, you are doing the same thing. So this circle is a circle of judgment, which is we are always in that psychic space, which is circular. We always want to turn the other into something that would be solidly posed there in front of you and separate from you, because you're good and they are bad. And in a judicial affair, you have a physical separation between the two. But Christianity is constantly abolishing this separation. So the prominence of Christianity is there, but I think it has to receive a Christian name. What Gerard says is that this the the accusation is the kingdom of Satan and that the self criticism is is what the fruit of the Holy Spirit is, that we discover that that we are not good, that we are not that we are not good. And this is much more in line with the Joker. We are not good and our motives aren't good and our capacity to save ourselves. You know, even if we were born with all the the lucky breaks of Brad Pitt, these we don't have. And and so where does that leave us? Now, this brings us to, as I mentioned in that other video again, the the amnesiac Christian morality, because we're using all of the elements of Christianity in order to critique and condemn Christianity. But what we must do to do this is to say that people are good, especially me, except for the bad ones. See if I remember this link. Yes. Death, you know, and there is a tendency in our world to see violent death as the worst possible evil. But throughout history, there are many people who had values which were more important than their own life. And to a certain extent, you almost feel like you have to rehabilitate this today as our life on this earth in a world without God, where there is nothing else and so forth. Now, in that video, what the what the vegan activist wants to do is to tell them that, you know, there are values more important than your desire to eat meat. You castrate, you, as C.S. Lewis says in The Abolition of Man, you castrate the gelding and then bid them to produce. You've given him no reason to do this. Becomes the one exclusive value and so forth. People didn't feel that way. They felt that it was better to kill people with a sword and be finished with it in two minutes than to deliver them into hell by allowing the albigensian heresy to take over their souls. So killing their body, which would resurrect anyway, since they really believed in the resurrection, was the lesser evil, was the good sacrifice. Today, we don't admit that anymore. And we are right. But we have to try to understand them. We are the first to regard violence the way we do. They were still partly they had one of their two feet in the previous world. Now, again, if we would look at rationality rules, it would be rational to, well, what do we have to do with those who are putting the planet at risk with their behaviors? Well, get them off the planet. But, well, what's the minimum amount of violence that we can tolerate? Well, maybe if we killed them, well, that would then incite us to believe that our cause is right because their cause is justified by the killing of others. And then if we look at the greenhouse emissions of China and India and Africa and the developing world, well, maybe if we start by keeping them poor because it doesn't seem like we can have both equality and this chosen path to eliminating CO2. Or, you know, Peterson says, well, maybe we can make them wealthy enough so we have to spend CO2 to reduce CO2. And again, my focus is not that debate. But the point is, what does rationality require? Because what we bump into is that, in fact, the same thing we always bump into when dealing with human beings is other people's hearts. We can't change other people's hearts. And so why violence? We do violence in order to stop other people. That's what we do. That's what we do. But why can we no longer brag about our violence today? Well, it's because of Christ. You know, today, for instance, you have the discussions between Muslims and Christians, which in my way are very weird because Christians see themselves as totally guilty toward the Muslim because they've been violent to the Muslim. OK. And this is true. And they are guilty from a Christian point of view. But they are certainly not guilty from a Muslim point of view, since the Muslims are supposed to spread the Muslim faith through the sword. There is no doubt of that. Today, it's not said anymore because everything is becoming Christian in a certain way. But the through the sword is an absolute obligation. And there was no sin fall in the spread of the Muslim world. It wasn't done through convincing, you know, people, little people and so forth to become Christian. It was done through the sword by the fastest and the greatest military conquest the world has ever known. But in discussions between Muslims and Christians, it goes without saying that you will never talk about that. Because in these discussions, we take Christian ethics to be the absolute value. It's a modern value and it doesn't come from Christianity. Now, I think when you look at the question of why the political left is so silent on the treatment of women by Islam and some of these other issues, the defense of Islam, I think that this actually has to do with what Girard is saying. It's the natural way to be for us. And when the people complain about the violence that came from Christianity, they are right. But they are throwing back at Christian values, not their own. They can complain because they have Christianity to complain with. From what point of view, otherwise, could they blame Christianity? We don't radicalize things enough. We take for granted certain aspects of Christian ethics as if they had been the norm. If you had gone to a Roman functionary and if you had said, I'm a victim of your system, you owe me some kind of compensation, it would have been so nice, you know, and you would say you deserve to die for saying that. What right do you have? Are you a Roman citizen? No. To the scaffold or to the wild beasts, we don't see the world as it is, you know, as it was. And in a way, there still is. We always turn against Christianity, the foothold into nonviolence that it gave us. Where would it come from before? Condemning Christianity's failures while taking its achievement for granted leads, in Girard's view, to an upside down view of history. We read the record of Western civilization as a violent sequence of crusades, inquisitions, and colonial conquests, but we often overlook the violence of the cultures that were overcome by the West. Girard gives as an example. Whenever someone does the little thing of naming the land that the Europeans took away from an indigenous population, I always wonder, is there no one there to name the previous indigenous population that the named indigenous population took the land away from? Was their genocide so complete that in fact, those people are the victims or the ones before them or the ones before them? Because isn't that the bottleneck that is one bottleneck after another of how this world is? That's how this world is. And it's only Christianity that comes along and says, you know what we've done in doing this? That was wrong. It's Christianity that takes on the self-criticism and says, hmm, I should do something about this. An example, the institution of potlatch, a feast involving competitive gift giving and the destruction of wealth that was practiced among the tribes of the Pacific coast of North America. At some point, the Canadian government banned potlatch. And if you look at the documents, you realize that they banned potlatch for an extremely good reason. It was a tremendous destruction of wealth, in particular blankets, you know, or things like that, which was a dreadful thing. Potlatch is as bad as anorexia and bulimia. You know, it's destruction which ultimately is for the prestige of the two or three chiefs who are fighting about who will destroy the greatest quantity of goods. Now, think about Canadian people in the 19th century, rationalists and so forth. They felt it was their duty to forbid such an institution. Can you blame them for that? Girard argues that we should try to understand why people acted as they did in the past rather than blaming them. He says this, I think, not to excuse evil acts, but to point up a prevalent form of scapegoating. Blaming our ancestors always implies the claim that we would have done better in their shoes. It's a way of protesting our eternal innocence and brightening our self-esteem. And this is what he objects to. Otherwise, he says, he has no wish to try to justify the terrible and undeniable suffering of which Western civilization has been the cause. I have absolutely no right, you know, to say this is worth that and you can pile up suffering that high in order. I don't want to do that. I just say I'm a Christian. I believe that it's all for the good. But it's only faith. I don't want to justify it. I can justify it with all sorts of arguments, but they are no good because when it's real suffering, you have to remain silent. A rush to judgment, René Girard says, is characteristic of our time. And by this excessively critical spirit, he says, we too easily put ourselves above the world. I think what is lacking in an attitude which is too negative is gratitude. You know, one of the things in Judeo-Christian tradition, which is tremendously important, is the praise of God. And that's what we seem to be unable to do in the modern world. We are all rebellion. And we are self-righteous rebellion because we say we are better than this history. We would do better if we were in the place of God. That's all it means. Rationality towards what end? The thesis of this video is we should talk. The assumption behind this video, ironically, are deeply Christian. Which is why Peterson, when you talk to Dilla Huntie and Harris, says, there's a lot of Christianity in you. Now what if killing is a feature and not a bug? What does that say about us? It's, Thiel gets this from Girard. He notes it when he gives it. We want to know the minimum violence necessary. Necessary for what? But it's not the minimum violence of, the minimum violence that I will endure for the sake of the other. That's not what we're asking. The minimum violence that I have to do in order to pursue and achieve my goal. So, I'll be dead one day, says the young man. So the government has to fix it. I eat meat. I choose my own hierarchy. And that hierarchy goes above whatever other agenda you might bring to me. Do we save the world by making the developing world our victim or scapegoat? Do we not see how this is simply the Roman way? But what of the man that René Girard speaks? Because Jesus defeats the Roman Empire. But he does so in a way that all of us recoil from. Because it's not the way of the life of Brian, Judean's people's front. It's not the way that everyone in Jesus' culture war was imagining Jesus should conquer with. Because the kingdom of Satan always conquers in only one way. Jesus' way is an unthinkable way. Jesus' way does not, is not, is not afraid of bottlenecks. Because the bottleneck is clear. Jesus in the garden says, if anybody's blood is going to be shed, it's going to be mine. I will be the victim. I will be the innocent victim. You will kill me. And by my stripes, you will be healed. Living in an atomic age, what kind of a world did you think you were living in? For really, the naturalistic conclusion is unbelievable. If science teaches us that our own minds are chance arrangements of atoms, there must be some mistake. Because if that was so, then the sciences themselves would be chance arrangements of atoms. And we should have no reason for believing in them. There's only, there's only one way to avoid this deadlock. We must go back to a much earlier view. We must simply accept it that we are spirits, free and rational beings, inhabiting an irrational universe. And must draw the conclusion that we are not derived from it. We are strangers here. We come from somewhere else. Nature is not the only thing that exists. There is another world. And that is where we come from. All that we say about nature, red and tooth and claw, about death and time, and our half bashful attitude toward our own bodies, is quite inexplicable on the theory that we're simply natural creatures. If this world is the only world, how did we come to find its laws so dreadful or so comic? If there is no straight line elsewhere, how did we discover that nature's line is crooked? What then is nature? And how did we come to be imprisoned in a system so alien to us? Oddly enough, the question becomes much less sinister the moment one realizes that nature's not all. No, mistaken for our mother, she's terrified. But if she's only our sister, if she and we have a common creator, then the situation is quite tolerable. Nature is indeed a rough playfellow. There are elements of evil in her. Oh, to explain that would carry us far back. I would have to, I should have to speak of powers and principalities and all that would seem to a modern person most mythological. But this is not the place, nor do these questions come first. It is enough to say here that nature, like us, is alienated from her creator, though in her, as in us, gleams of the old beauty remain. It is our business to live by our own law, not by hers, to follow in private and in public life the law of love and temperance, even when they seem to be suicidal. And not the law of competition and grab, even when they seem to be necessary for our survival. For it is part of our spiritual law never to put survival first. We must resolutely train ourselves to feel that the survival of man on this earth is not worth having unless it can be had by honorable and merciful means. Nothing is more likely to destroy a species than a determination to survive at all costs. Those who care for something else more than civilization are the only people by whom civilization is at all likely to be preserved. Those who want heaven most have served earth best on living in an atomic age by C.S. Lewis.