https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=82SzWEmQHCI

 Okay. And you've, you're pretty well set up there. You got a nice mic, so sound should be good. Awesome. Yeah, you sound good. Well, I was just, I just was skimming over the rather lengthy email that you sent me and it was a lovely email. So I really appreciate that, but not everybody gets to read that. And so if we share this, you know, we'll, we'll have to see, but why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself, Michael? Sure. Um, I don't know how much detail I can go into from completely from the email, but, um, this summarize, I, I grew up in the, uh, as a Christian in the Pentecostal church, uh, somebody got, um, grew up in Southern California, uh, and then moved out to the East coast when I was in high school. And, um, I, I would say I was, I had a real faith of sorts, but, um, at the same time I was, uh, just as a, my very nature was very skeptical. Um, I think I told you this in the email, I had this, I can very vivid experience being like five or six years old and asking God to let me fly as like a test. And even things like, you know, like whether Santa Claus is real and things like that, I can remember a very real age in the young age, having this kind of idea that things that are too good to be true are, you know, too good to be true. And, um, but, um, I always had kind of this, um, a faith of sorts just because, um, um, specifically my dad, I always, he, you know, he was just such a good person and somebody I had a lot of confidence in. And so I always felt like there was something he was in touch with something that was real. Um, and, um, but at some point in later in life, um, you know, just some things happen to my family, um, that all, I won't go into too much detail in, but, um, it just, that kind of skepticism reasserted itself. And, um, once, once I, I realized my, my faith was built on something other than my own, um, kind of, uh, account or worldview. It was kind of built on my attachment to somebody else's. And, um, and once I lost that, it was, um, it was pretty disorienting, you know, to, to have that kind of fall apart. Um, but at the same time, even though I had a kind of a skepticism towards my faith and that kind of fell apart, it also, I never really had, uh, too much of a, I never really found the materialist view of the world that persuasive either. Um, it just, something about it didn't click. Like it just, it seemed, it was obvious to me. And I actually read a lot of kind of, um, the new atheist books and evangelical like, um, you know, like the Lee Strobel's and Josh McDowell's and things like that, trying to, cause I knew I had to figure something out for myself. Um, and, uh, I was, I always had this awareness reading all those, those works that they're, everybody has an ax to grind. Like they, they're coming at this not like with a, it's not like an open-minded investigation of facts. It's like, you know, whether it's the new atheist or others, there's all kinds of jumping across points of, uh, of what, what they hold up as evidence didn't seem like evidence to me. Um, so I kind of was in this long period where I really kind of had, just had a default kind of, I still had a sense that there was something in the Christian story that was right and correct, but, um, it wasn't, it wasn't certainly wasn't, I wasn't going to church, uh, wasn't, you know, living a life that was recognizable as Christian by anybody around me. Um, and, um, that was kind of my experience for, for, I don't know, a good long vibe. I'd say about better part of 10, 10 years or so. Um, and, um, kind of the shift for me was, uh, was a very odd time in my life where I just had a lot of things kind of collapse at once in a single year. Um, had a breakup with a long time girlfriend. I had, uh, um, I unexpectedly like got laid off from my job and it was just, like this whole kind of crescendo of things in a very short timeframe. And one of the things I found her in that timeframe, I found myself at odd points, um, just being overcome with emotion and I'm, I've never been like a very emotional person. I would say most people would probably say I'm, I'm a little flat in the, you know, um, it's, it's, I'm not, I don't, I've got a good poker face most of the time and I'll give away a lot emotionally. And I found myself like, oddly just overcome with emotion all the time. And, um, I, I, I'm, I took it to be just kind of, okay, well, you just had a rough year and you know, maybe you're not that in touch with your emotions and you know, this is just kind of some weird side effect and consequence of that. And, um, so I kind of ignored it for a pretty long time. Um, and, um, I, I'm not sure exactly what woke me up to one day, but I can remember, I have like an Evernote, like I scrawl lots of notes to myself all the time. And I, so I know the actual day when I did this, I just decided I'm, I should, I should pay attention to this. And, and funny enough what came to mind when I was doing that too, I, I, um, I think I wrote this in the email as well that, you know, David Foster Wallace's his famous thing that humans worship, like everybody worships. It's like, you don't have a choice. Like it's, it's something kind of fundamental to what, whatever we are as humans, that's, that's built in. And if you don't consciously choose whatever it is you worship, something else kind of assert itself there on its own. And you just imbibe something from the air or the culture around you. It goes there. Yep. And, um, and I realized when I started on looking under pinning this emotion, it was usually I'd start crying and, um, that it wasn't really, I, I expected that I was going to, I don't know, find something like, oh, like I'm, I'm sad about something with losing my job or breakup, but it wasn't that at all. It was more this, like a sense of more gratitude and a sense that in the middle of all this pain I was experienced, there was something really good coming out of it. And, um, so that, that, um, that sense was, was really weird to me because I didn't really, I don't think I had a belief. I don't, I didn't, certainly didn't have a strong sort of Christian belief, but I still have this kind of sense that there's, there's gotta be something out there that I don't know because again, I didn't have the, uh, I didn't think anybody from a material scientific perspective piece things together in a way that was convincing. So I was just kind of like open to, to some idea of something, but it was really clear to me that this idea with some fundamental level was, was an idea of redemption of like things that they're worst somehow being turned topsy turvy back into like becoming something good. Um, and I was, it was like, I was, I was very aware and grateful that, that this thing that was negative was really working itself out in a positive way. And I didn't have any rational or reasonable reason to, to make that association, but it just, it felt very real and vivid and that there was, it was like, what, what, uh, why was, I was just overcome with a sense of beauty of like that, that in the worst possible scenarios, like something equally as good could be like this. I had this kind of conception visually of like, uh, like just this dark area that, you know, like a flower emerges and just like suddenly everything around is immediately transformed. Like there's this like, I don't know, just this, this immediate reversal at the, kind of the lowest. And, um, so anyway, I just had this kind of idea floating in my back, the background of, of my mind. And, um, it was about a month or two later, I, um, I just started dating another girl, um, who was, um, she kind of had a similar background to me in terms of like, she had issues with her past, um, and she was wanting me to go to church with her. And I think I had gone to a church with her a few times and she, we went on a double date with another couple. And I just remember just really liking the couple. Like I just like immediately, I'm just being really attracted to them in a fundamental way. And the, um, the guy, um, I, I just really liked the guy and I just really liked the guy. And I just really liked the guy. The, the, um, the guy, um, I, I just was like, man, I want to be this guy's friend, like, which is, which is very strange to me. And, um, he had, um, he grew up Jewish and actually had become, he'd become saved, um, by just listening on the radio to this, uh, this guy, Mark Rutland, who is the, the president of the college where I went to school, I actually went to a Pentecostal Bible college for school. And, um, that's how he'd become saved. And, um, so I, um, I just found it odd that I had this thought. I remember walking away being like, I don't think I've ever had that thought before upon meeting somebody. I want to be their friend. And, um, it wasn't, but like, I think it was maybe a couple of weeks or a month later. Um, he was, he would, that, um, guy was using a tragic accident. He, um, and he was actually celebrating his engagement and, uh, ended up being, um, paralyzed. He, like, it was like just a freak accident, like hit a sandbar in the ocean. And it was paralyzed from the neck down. Oh my goodness. And, um, yeah, it was just, it was just unbelievable. And, um, and, uh, I remember, I, I had maybe hung out with him maybe once or twice before that. And he came back and I knew he was in the hospital and I just had this, this, this sense like, well, you know, I, I really do really want to be this guy's friend and he's a captive audience. He could probably use one now. Exactly. So, um, I started just going to visit him at the, um, at the, uh, the hospital when, um, and just, um, had a lot of opportunities to just kind of share where I was at. You know, I was kind of, um, talking about, you know, where, where I was at, you know, in terms of my, these kinds of ideas whirling around me in terms of, uh, where I was at, uh, like it started going to church, but it was like, really didn't know what I believed. And, um, somewhere in the middle of all that, I just remember having this really clear idea of, um, that God loved this, this guy. And, um, it was, I was actually thinking about this today. I was like, I, it's hard. Again, I'm a very skeptical person. So as soon as I start having a strong emotion, I'm like, Oh, what's, what's the source of what, what self motivation do I have for this? You know, but I just, it was something I, I put into, um, I couldn't get away from. And I felt like I ended up actually telling him, like, you know, I just feel like I'm supposed to tell you this. And it was, it was hard to tell somebody that like that too, like where, you know, they obviously had this horrible thing happen. It's like, and I don't have any framework or reference for, you know, how this is, um, true, but it, it was undeniably true to me. And that kind of, I don't know that that's just kind of laid the groundwork, I think, for, for getting me back to a place where I started going to church, um, and, um, taking this more seriously, I ended up going to, when he got out of the hospital, I started going to a small group with him. And, um, and then, I guess it was probably about, I don't know, six months or a year later that, um, Jordan Peterson that I discovered him and through him discovered you and, um, that kind of, I hadn't really thought through any of those things intellectually. I was having all these emotional experiences like of, of some sort of reality. Um, but that kind of gave another like intellectual oomph to, um, to fitting it all together, you know, in terms of, uh, from, uh, um, that side of things as well. So that kind of, kind of cemented it for me. Cause it's, I think to that point, I was kind of just like how I feel today, it's like dictated, um, you know, my level of faith, but that there was something and Peterson, especially that, that it made me realize that the part of me that I thought was smart and cynical also had its own, it had something to gain with its nihilism, which was kind of this, you know, as soon as you, as you, as soon as you believe the nihilism now you're off the hook, you know, you know, if it doesn't matter, then I can't be held responsible for what I do. It was a, it was a get out of jail free card of sorts. And he, he, he really cemented that home to me powerfully where I realized I had to look at the mirror like, wow, that's, that's, that's a big motivating factor. I can't look at this as like me being tough and smart and, and honest with myself when I come away with this nihilism, there's, there's something else that I'm getting in as well from it. Um, and that, that kind of pushed me down that path to really dismantle that to a large degree. And then, and then when I found you, um, it was, it wasn't just the dismantling of the nihilism. It was something else from an intellectual perspective that replaced it like, and really lined up with kind of these, or like imagistic or emotional ideas I had about redemption that were lined up with a lot of the things that you were saying that kind of, I don't know, um, gave it more structure, if that makes sense. Um, and so, I mean, I really wanted to thank you, um, for, um, one of the reasons I want to talk to you just cause I feel like it's just played a fundamental role in terms of like being something solid. I mean, I don't know how many hours you've put in online, but like, I mean, I've probably watched at least 90% of it and it's been something that has really, I don't know, transformed my thinking and in a lot of ways and given me a way of, uh, digesting so many things and, and, um, just a way of, of, of, uh, accountability, like the, the consistency that you display in terms of your intellectual approach and just your honesty and just the way you interact with people. It's, um, I don't know, it's been hugely beneficial to me. So I just want to say thank you. Well, that's, that's, I appreciate that. It's, I've put in a lot of hours, but for me, most of it has been process for me too. You know, we, we talk through and work out our faith and fear and trembling. And I like the way you told your story. I mean, you have these, even if you're not the guy whose feelings are necessarily right there on your shirt sleeve, they're down there and you have to work them through and work them out. And, and I, you know, the David Foster Wallace, um, point I think is a, is a very good one. And you know, what a, you know, what a shame, what a shame he's, you know, he took his life and he's no longer around to, to share himself with us. It's a, it's a robbery of the world, but, um, it's no, you, you've got a, you've got a beautiful story. Um, so, so where, where has that, so where has that led you now? Um, I did say it's tough to say I'm, I don't know. I, I'm, I feel like I, I get drawn into really abstract and philosophical and theological areas, well as stuff and you know, I don't know. I, you know, I try to, to just be consistent about going to church and like being involved in my small group and, um, but I still feel like friendship with that, that individual. How's he doing? He's doing well. Um, I actually was just talking to him before I talked to you and he was, he was excited to hear, uh, that we were going to talk. Um, good. Um, what a, what a huge life transition though. I assume he's not, he's a young, younger man. I mean, he's, he's about the same age as I am. Yeah. Okay. Wow. He's married. Um, yeah. And then he got engaged beforehand and, and, um, yeah. So like, she went through with it. Yeah. It's, um, it's powerful. Yeah. That like, it's, uh, it's had an impact on, I'm sure like on, on so many people, myself included, you know? Yeah. Yeah. Cause you know, when you, when you, when you enter a relationship, you know, knowing, you know, there's a lot of loss that the couple will suffer in something like that. So, wow, that's, that's, that's just powerful stuff when people walk that road together. Yeah. And I think that's one of the things that's always been helpful to me in, in, in watching you is I feel like you, you don't really shy away from the pain and suffering that's in the world. I think that's, you know, and, and, and not still, and still holding onto a Christian perspective within it. Um, it's good. Yeah, it is difficult. It's, um, it's so many times in church, it's, it's, uh, it's just within the framework of a, of a short sermon, it's hard to, uh, encompass the complexity that, that comes with, with that pain and suffering and the, uh, what we, what we preach of the gospel. It's Tim Keller has this great way of saying it that I haven't, I should write it down and memorize it where I find it because I've, I've heard him say it a couple of times. It's lodged in my head, but it's, it's basically the point that, you know, people throw away, people often throw away their faith in the face of suffering. But when you think about that, what are they exchanging? You know, it's, it's just kind of, okay, I can't believe because of the suffering, getting rid of it. Okay. So what do you got instead? And it's kind of connects up with that David Foster Wallace point that they've thrown away faith. They've thrown away that the idea, okay, God, they're angry. Okay. So the reacting, so God isn't real or God isn't good. And so react and so, okay. And, and you see this actually in relationships where if you watch someone who, if you watch someone who has a real, someone for whom anger has become a part of their personality has become their go-to response. They wind up throwing a lot of things away that might in the long run have actually helped them because that's what anger does. And, and so people then do that with their faith. And it's like, so what takes its place? Neolism and I love the way you phrased, I'm taking, I've got a new pattern now with these conversations where I take notes because I forget and then I don't know what to title it or do anything when I got to post it a couple of weeks later, but I'm really enjoying the note taking. But when you said, when you made the observation that you were getting something from neolism and that's really good. And that's a really fine observation because there is this weird emotional status satisfaction that we get from it. And I think that emotional satisfaction is from our, I think we feel like we now have a sense of mastery. We might be like Scar and the lion King being the King over a kingdom of devastation, but at least we're King, you know, Well, at least we get the joke. Yeah. And you know, and, and Hey, if the house is going to be burned down, at least I burned down the house. It's like, okay, but the house is burned down. And at some point, you know, and I think that that road, you know, I love Kierkegaard's image and despair unto death where the person decides enough with it. And so they kill themselves only to realize that physical death didn't end their self and the sudden horror of realizing, I can't stop this thing that I hate, which is myself or the pain that has so bonded to myself. I mean, these are, these are just such powerful things and people, you know, people get trapped in them and sometimes so completely not of their own fault. You know, mental illness. You watch someone who's grappling with depression or bipolar or, you know, you watch someone in there and it's, it's, oh, it's, it's horrible. Yeah. And I think it's, it's interesting to see too, the, um, the anger that the atheist have for God that doesn't exist. There's, um, there's something there, um, that it's like, uh, I've thought about it this way, that there's a sense in which there's a function that for ultimate justice to be there, there has to be this thing, this God, and there's this, an idea that I think the atheist has that he's abdicated that role and that they're the ones that have figured it out and that they're the ones that are going to cast the first stone and, and they're almost like, they can't wait for God to, uh, to come and try and haul them into a court because they're like, I'm going to accuse you and that day comes, you know, and there's a, it's, it's so strange, um, that this kind of anger and self righteousness for something that doesn't exist by their own claim. Well, anger, proper anger, anger is a proper response to injustice. And you know, there is, there is some truth to the angry nihilist or atheist who looks at the universe and says, you know, there's injustice here and it shouldn't be. And what's so interesting is that they instinctively know, and this is kind of my ontological argument that gets conjoined to the moral argument that they, there should be a judge, you know, it isn't right that Stalin got away with it or that Hitler got away with it or that Mao got away with it. And, and, or that, you know, on a personal level for someone, maybe someone had a horrible parent that, you know, that this person who had wronged them got away with it. And that shouldn't be right. And of course, in a, in a Christian context, well, they won't. And, and then you begin to think, well, okay, but how, how exactly can justice be served in the age to come? And we have to then say, well, we don't know. And it's probably true that none of us would be able to, to actually bring justice in a, in a case like that. And all of our courts are, are these sort of ways that we can imagine through which we can imagine that kind of divine justice. And so they reflect it. They're kind of a, a, they're kind of a derivative form of that divine justice. And so when, when real justice happens in courts, it's, it connects up with that. But, you know, if you have no, if you have no God, finally Mao got away with it. And that's, that's both deeply disturbing and also tempting in all the wrong ways. And so even from that point of view, you could begin to see why this entire story of Christianity is good for people and civilization. You know, even, even if you say, well, I don't think there's anything to it. Yeah. But the cost of not believing it. Yeah. That's, that's a real problem. And you say, well, I can't just believe it because it's good for me. Yeah. That's a real problem too. So this is, this is all important stuff. Yeah. One of the things I wanted to ask you about is your Calvinism as, as, and as it relates to free will, where do, where do you stand in terms of what your thoughts are on free will? Well, I like to, I don't really like the term free will. I more like real agency, I think, because none of our wills are free. We're, we're formed where we're within a culture, we're deeply embedded. The, we do have agency and that agency is real and that agency is accountable. I think, I think, you know, Calvinism is sort of a compatibilism. They, they want it both ways. And I think that the heart of the matter is that we don't, we don't have a clear idea how divine agency and human agency actually line up. And part of that is because of, again, part of it is because of, you know, what I call God number one in terms of the God who was imminent, the God who was built in, you know, I was, I was, so I got into a little tiny little squabble on Sunday with a celebrity atheist on Twitter and, um, you know, because he was making a lot of money, you know, because he was making, he was using kind of Peter Boghossian's idea of what faith is, which I think just doesn't really, it doesn't make any sense. But, you know, when you think about something like, if you'd ask an American, do you believe in Uncle Sam? And they'd say, well, um, I say you pay taxes to Uncle Sam, but you're not saying that Uncle Sam is a guy in Washington, DC. No, I'm not. That's not exactly what Uncle Sam is, but Uncle Sam is very real. And Uncle Sam in fact does things and, and Uncle Sam, in fact, my agency and Uncle Sam's agency, if I travel overseas and I'm an American in whatever cultural context and I express the Uncle Sam that is in me, you know, the agency between me and Uncle Sam is sort of complicated because, because certainly I do not disappear. In some perspectives, people might see Uncle Sam through me, but if the more they get to know me, the higher the resolution, they would begin to see me and Uncle Sam. But that's not God number one. But even, even in that, even with that purview, not to mention God as, as trans, as transcendent and active and choosing, but even with that purview, you can begin to see that this, this question of human agency and divine agency is, is enormously complex. You know, what's interesting about your story is, I've made this point a number of times. Pentecostalism, I don't think is really a theological tradition as much as it is a, a cultural, a cultural protest to modernity, because Pentecostalism in a sense says, it sees modernity and the lines that modernity draws and just says, no, because we're going to, I mean, God's going to be active in my life. God's going to speak through us in terms of speaking in tongues. God's going to give words of wisdom and prophecy and the whole nine yards. And that's part of the reason that Pentecostalism all around the world, especially in the developing world and places where, where modernity isn't quite so strong. It's just, it's just natural, because, but we identify it as Pentecostalism, but it's not really a theological tradition. It's much more of a cultural movement that says no to modernity. So, you know, Calvinism, it's so funny because Calvin, Calvin essentially was a second generation reformer who took a lot of what Luther had done and some of the other Luther gets all the press because he's Martin Luther and he moved first and he didn't get killed and all of that. But, but there are a lot of reformers who are taking things. And so John Calvin took a lot of this stuff and kind of synthesized it, put it in his, put it in his, his institutes, put it in his commentaries. You know, that stuff then kind of got promoted out through the Geneva Bible. And the thing Calvin is known for is it's really double predestination, which I'm not going to go into that right now, but, but his ideas of, of divine election were basically the same ideas as the Roman Catholic Church and the Lutheran Church. Those, and so it was later in the, in the 16th century or the 17th century that in the, in the, in the, the canons of Dort and the, and the Senate of Dort that some of this, some of this other Calvinism kind of took play, kind of got worked in there. So even though, you know, I, I certainly subscribe to the canons of Dort, which are a doctrinal statement of my denomination. I don't know that that expresses the heart of Calvinism. And so, so often these, these Calvinist ideas, these Calvinist conversations just get locked in a lot of 17th century disputes with Arminianism. And I, I don't, I don't find it, I don't find it a terribly fruitful conversation because I don't think we have a good idea of how God works, how God's agency and our agency really connect. Part of that is the end of, I love Joseph's little speech at the end of Genesis, you know, it says to his brothers, you meant it for evil, but God meant it for good. And it's like, okay, God meant beating up, planning the death of, and then selling your brother into slavery for good. So complicated stuff. Yeah. Have you, how far, I know you've talked about Owen Barfield, how far have you gone down the rabbit hole with him? Not far enough. Okay. I, you know, I was, so there's a verveky video that is not in his series, an interview that he did with someone who, which is really nice to our video covers a lot of his stuff, but he goes into, he goes into talking about, you know, how reading changed in the 12th century. And I heard that and I thought, huh, because there definitely is something. And I just talked to a Filipino, a couple of guys in front of you who is a member of Opus Dei, which is an interesting sub movement within Roman Catholicism. But, you know, he was talking about how he kind of looked at the sacraments and said, well, I think that the Roman Catholics and the Orthodox, the Orthodox, have a view of the sacrament that is closest to the ancient church. And I think that's probably true. The difficulty that we, the difficulty that we have is that our concepts of language have continued to move. So when we say things like, well, transubstantiation, that the, that the sacrament changes into the body and blood. Well, I don't know that those words mean the same thing today as they did 1500 years ago. That's one of the, yeah, that's one of the points Owen is making. Yeah, I'm reading like two or three books associated with him right now. And one of, one of his ideas is that you can look at the histories of words in, in as a, as a kind of means of exploring the consciousness of, of, you know, men that existed far back in time, especially in older words. Um, and, and one of his ideas is that, you know, that a lot of these words he uses off the example of Numa, I know you brought that up where that for, for men in a different time that those, that those words weren't like, they were both and like they, they had both meanings together, the inner and the outer together. And that, um, you know, you could piece them apart somewhat, but that was more of a later phenomena that we have, that we have today of the kind of the division of those things. Um, and that, um, another thing that him and, uh, I'm reading another book called, um, it's called the great war. It's about their, um, it's about the argument that CS Lewis in, is there a book about the great war? Yeah. Oh, and, um, one of the, one of the big things that they had as a con point of contention was Owen Barfield had this idea that you could, that the imagination was a faculty for discerning truth. Um, whereas, um, CS Lewis believed, you know, that, um, you know, it's something had to be, you had to make a sort of factual statement for it to be true for untruthful. Whereas, you know, in, in Barfield's view, um, you know, the, the statements in them of themselves could never be truth. They could have some relationship to truth, but his idea of truth was more of a something like more like the process itself of knowing, which is, um, kind of an interesting thing. And, um, it kind of intersects with an idea. Another idea I wanted to talk to you about, which is, I guess, this, this idea about, I have that, that I'm kind of obsessed with, and I keep finding everywhere is this idea of like the humility of God. Um, and along with that is a, is a question about what, what does, what does it cost God to, to create and redeem? And, and that there might be some deeper sense to that. Like, I think, you know, some of the, if you look at say, um, you know, a lot of our ideas about God being like this kind of unchanging thing that doesn't feel pain and is kind of, you know, this, it's, it's like a Greek philosophical concept that God that is completely removed from all this, that, that doesn't seem accurate to me. Like when you read the Bible and they kind of like toss away a lot of the stories is the Bible is just metaphors, but it seems really clear that, that God changes his mind when people do things, that there's this real involvement that we have in the story where we are interacting with the divine, like that something changes in response to us, that he's moved when he sees some action in the heart of man that, that changes, you know, and I always think of that, that verse where it's like, he's searching the whole earth for, you know, hearts that are, you know, dedicated to him to show himself strong on their behalf. You know, there's something like there's a, there's desire there. So, and then yeah, I don't think if, if God is really unchanging there could even be desire. Like that doesn't make sense, you know, and it couldn't, there's all, you know, verses of God grieving. Um, and then I was, you know, I think, um, even in the creation story itself, you have this, this process that God goes through and then he rests at the end. And you could say, well, did he rest justice as symbolic acts so that we could rest later and, you know, and observe him. So the Sabbath or was, did he really expend himself in some full and complete way that the proper response to that was some sort of rest, you know, you can, you can see him like, you know, at age, each interval of these, these epochs or whatever you want to think of them days, you know, if we think about the scientific perspective, it had to be a long time, but it's some process where he comes back and says, this is good. What does it mean for like a God as infinite as what we believe in is what we see in the universe to like expend himself to the point and like look back and say, okay, this is good. Moving along, you know, like there seems, there's like a real process of work there and something that that is ongoing. And so that seems to align more with own barfields idea of, of some sort of process that's ongoing rather than like a God is a truth that's that's set in stone that. Um, and so it seems like there's this, this, this cost that God's playing. And also I think in terms of, you know, the, um, the cross, you know, you could think of the cross as a one off, but, but, but Jesus says that he comes to earth to show the father. And so you, you know, is, is, you know, this, does this Jesus bear the weight of, of all this pain, suffering himself, where he is, is God also partaking in that in his, in some way, you know, and you could think of like, you think of like a parent's relationship to their child in the ways in which the parent can experience the pain and suffering in that child and deeper and more fulfill like, like across many intervals of time that the child can't even see, like, like bad decisions they've made and other things where the parent feels the pain even deeper because they have, uh, more experience in faculties to experience that pain in a more deep way. Whereas the kid doesn't even see the what's going on. I think God has to experience our bad choices and all the pain and suffering in the world and in a deeper way because he has more capacity to do so. And he's, he's closer to all the facts. But I think, you know, he also experiences some of the joys in a deeper way than we have access to as well. Yeah. Yeah. Um, but it, I mean, it just, um, I don't know, I don't know. It seems like it's theologically something that people don't really dive into because it's kind of muddy. But like one of the things that I find interesting too is this idea that, um, you know, Paul talks about of us, the union of, of heaven and earth is also eventually union between God and man because, you know, he uses that, that, you know, the language of a body and a head and then, you know, man and a wife and the two become one flesh. And it's, it's a great mystery of which he can't, he can't find the language to speak of. So he leaves it out as a mystery. And then, so you like, what is that union? First of all, and what does that union cost God? Like what does he have to lay down in his infinite glory to be united to something finite, you know, that's something that we don't think about much, but, um, I don't know. It seems, it seems very clear to me that, that, that has to be happening, that, that God is in a moment by moment basis, that he's working something out and that, you know, when Jesus says I'm going to go prepare a place for you, that's not like he's going up in heaven and just like counting, like, you know, just sleeping until some time clock, you know, all right, it's over. Ring. It's time to wake up and Oh, get the horse. Yeah. The white one. It seems obvious something has to be going on. Well, that, that, that is the image in scripture of, you know, the God who is emotionally involved and, and the God who, the God who gets frustrated. And I love in, you know, the desert wanderings, God and Moses, almost like a married couple, uh, switch back and forth at who's, who's more, who's more upset at the children and wants them dead. And the other ones are, no, no, don't, that's not that you can't, you can't kill the kids. You gotta keep them around. Oh, but I'm tired of them. Yeah. But you know, if you, if you waste them here in the desert, then all the other nations will hear, ah, you couldn't keep your family together. So, you know, back and forth they go. And, and that's, you know, that's the, you know, that's the image that's, that's the revelation of God. And again, it's, you know, and to me, it always gets to the, the idea that that God is more so that God is, you know, does is God joyful? Yeah. Way more than we can imagine. Is God, does God feel pain and sorrow? Yeah. Way more than we can imagine. Does God get angry? Yeah. Way more than we can imagine. Is God merciful? Yeah. Way more than we can imagine. And we have difficulty with that because I was just reading GK Chesterton's orthodoxy chapter three or chapter, I was reading chapter three today, but I read chapter two last night and, and, and Chesterton has this great in that chapter. It's a great illustration of a madman where he says basically the madman, his, his cycle is too small. It's, you know, it's a circle. And so it's infinite, but it's too small. The, the madman can't get away from himself. And, and you just have this picture then if you think of, and he says, the same person actually their, their circle is a lot bigger, which is interesting. And then of course you'd think that, well, the God circle is, is infinitely large. So, whereas all the circles are in a sense infinite cause they all go around, there's no beginning and no end. God's is large and that then leads to the, the idea of God is more humble than we could imagine. Well, what would, what would entail in that humility? Well, it would mean that he would, he does not have to keep, he does not have to keep pointing to himself. He can give good gifts and, and just let the children enjoy them and even the rebellious children. And you know, the, one of my favorite parts of the sermon on the Mount where Jesus, Jesus talks about the perfection of God. And then when we, I, I found that when we people hear that, they usually think about that in terms of, in terms of moral, accomplishment, but actually the perfection of God is, is situated in the passage where it talks about God's generosity to the just and the unjust alike. And then that's when Jesus says, be perfect like your heavenly father is perfect. And in his generosity to the just and unjust alike. And it's like that, that takes enormous humility. And so it's, it's, it's a, it's an astounding thing. I've also been reading, reading, Will Durant was a, he, a couple actually, Will and his wife wrote histories, huge volumes of history at the beginning of the 20th century. He's got a little book on the story of philosophy, which is a, which is a really a fun little book in terms of if you want to learn some philosophy, you know, it's dated and, but it's, but he just tells and he makes the point about Aristotle exactly what you made. If you look at Aristotle's God, this isn't the kind of God, this isn't the kind of God you're going to relate to. Why bother praying? The God of Abraham, Abraham, you know, goes to God and says, Hey, is it right that you sweep away the just with the unjust? And God's like, you know, God isn't the kind of God that says, who are you to talk to me like that? God says, Oh, what's your point Abraham? Well, what if there's 50 righteous people in Sodom? Will you take it then? No, I'll, I'll spare it for 50. And you watch a bargain and you think about, you just think about this is astounding, but here it is, you know, and that God is, you know, the God of Job and the God of the Bible. And you think, well, that's, you know, that's pretty amazing. So, yeah, stranger than we could have come up with. Yeah, yeah, yeah, it certainly is stranger than we would dare come up with. I think that's true. Your mention of GK Chester didn't made me think of one of my favorite quotes by him, which he said, gratitude is, is happiness doubled by wonder. Oh, that's good. That that one's always kind of hit me between the eyes. I remember hearing it for the first time. It was like on Thanksgiving and it came on NPR of all places. And that's, it's just stuck with me. And one of the things I think, I was thinking about what the other day, like what Jordan Peterson has kind of brought to the, what he's done that's interesting and unique. I think that's one of the things he's kind of brought is those two things of gratitude and wonder. And it's kind of, kind of incumbent and, or, or enclosed in his ideas of maps of meaning is, you know, this idea that the world, we're not seeing the world as it really is, that, that your conceptions of the world are not the world itself. And so in, in, in kind of hammering that home, he's, he's also saying, hey, but there's a lot more behind it that you don't see and that you could, if you wanted to go explore. And so I think, you know, that, especially the reason that has such an effect on me is that I think that's such an appeal, I think to the male is like, it's like, there's all this uncharted territory. There are all these, you know, like we live in a time where, you know, the whole earth is mapped down to the last millimeter with, you know, GPS coordinates and he's coming along and saying, but there's actually these frontiers that are just, just outside of those, just dig beneath that map. And there's a whole bunch of stuff, that you could discover. And that's kind of what he, if you listen to his lecture, that I think that's what's interesting about what he's always doing. He's always amazed by these little tidbits of information he's, he's presenting. Like he's found the most amazing thing. It seems, a lot of this stuff seems so trivial, but he's like, no, no, no, no, this is really important. Just, just stay with me. And he kind of, I think he's, he's demonstrating that, um, that sense of wonder could be a part of, of much more of our lives. If we were aware of what's, what's really in front of us. That's very true. No, I think, I think you're right. And I think he has evoked that in a lot of people. I think it's part of his appeal. Well, we just have a couple more minutes, Michael. I don't know if there's anything that was on your list that you wanted to make sure you got in. No, I just want to, but I would like to ask you, I'm curious, um, how, how has this whole thing that you've gone through this journey, how's it, how has it changed you? I mean, you've, this is like, uh, yeah, I, so many hours that you must've been like put into this process. And like, I'm just curious, like what, what it's been like for you and what's come out of it. Well, part of, part of I've always been a lifelong learner. And so part of in terms of the time budget that this comes out of is my learning. And this has been a, this has been a deeply fruitful learning experience for me, partly just because there've been a lot of new conversation partners and you can learn things from books, but you can also learn things from people who ask challenging questions back at you. So learning has been a big part of this. You know, the, the, the big surprise for this for me was a lot of the attention and the, and then the requests for content and conversation. And again, as, as, as a pastor, well, that's sort of my job in terms of people want to talk to me. Well, I should talk to them and it's ministry. So obviously it's expanded the circle of my ministry and my local church has been very generous in sharing me like they have. So, you know, it's, I hope it doesn't, you know, I hope it, I hope it doesn't change me too much. It's certainly given me some new opportunities, but I'm, you know, I'm leery of the kind of influence that it seems almost ridiculous to use these words, but fame and fortune can have on a person. Sure. That's, that's a real, that's a, that's a very dangerous thing because you, you then begin to, you, you have to please the crowd and pastors know this because this is always a, something that's built into being a pastor. You have to please your local church who are your bosses and the ones paying you, but technically you're not really your God is your boss, not them. So there's always this tension and if that gets magnified in terms of larger audiences, you know, then, then suddenly you stop telling the truth about things. You stop being honest. You know, when Peterson had his little, even just saying it now, it'll, if we share this, it'll bring a lot of comments, but even Peterson's tweet about the Kavanaugh business, you know, part of that certainly was, you know, the certain part of his following felt betrayed in that. And I don't think it was a particularly, I don't think he thought through that tweet and Twitter is Twitter is a device that's prone to temptation. But once you have an audience and once that audience is, it's kind of like feeding the, it's kind of like feeding the bear. The dangerous thing isn't really feeding the bear. The dangerous thing is stop feeding the bear. That's when things get dangerous. The bear is happy. If you keep giving him what he wants, you stop feeding the bear. You got a bear to deal with. So, and I think about that. And fortunately, you know, I, I wrestle with, you know, do I want this thing to grow a lot? It's, you know, over the last number of months, especially, it's kind of had a nice fairly slow growth rate, which has been manageable. But I, I like, I like doing these conversations. I think they're healthy for me because you're a real person. You're not someone else who is playing a, a status game. I mean, you don't, you know, you don't, you know, if we post it, and you'll see yourself on YouTube and you'll get some comments and all of that. And maybe you want to start your own YouTube channel, but, but you're a real person. And the problem is that the higher you get in a status game, the less people that are real people that are real around you. And then suddenly this game starts making its own weather and you're, you're doing things and you just get disconnected from the massive lives and the incredible diversity of people's lives. And what's so gratifying about conversations like this is, you know, your story is unique. I mean, it sounds trite and you know, it sounds, but your story is unique and it's, it's, it's a worthwhile thing sharing. And to the degree that, you know, I've got 11,000 YouTube subscribers and probably a thousand or 2000 people will watch this video over the next few weeks. I think it's a good thing that others get to see and hear your story because there'll be pieces of it that they'll be able to pick up and say, huh, that, that's helpful for me. And so to be a part of it. In the case with watching, I think that's one of the things that's been so helpful is just seeing there's something about the idiosyncrasies of people's lives. You know, the unique aspect that you mentioned that you can't fake. And so if you're, if you're searching for truth, when you see certain things in other people's lives, they just, they just gleam at you with this kind of thing that you know, that's, that that can't be faked. That's something real happened there. That's unique to that person. And it can't be, you can't wave it away. Yeah. Like you can, like a philosophical argument. Yeah. So that, that to me, this is, I'm so, I'm so humbled and gratified by, by this and will it, how long will it go on? I have no idea. You know, these things, life has seasons, things come and go. If I had a million subscribers, can Jordan Peterson do this? No, not really, because he would have to have some sort of filtering mechanism. And then the filter itself would then be that which is presented. You know, if you shine a light through a screen, you get the shadow of the screen. You know, it might be hard to see, but it's there. And so what's, what's beautiful about this. Yeah. It's a, it's a sample because of the people watching my videos, but it's, it's a lovely thing. And so I'm just gratified by it and, and feel happy that I can, this is what's going on now. How long will it go on? I have no idea, but thank God for today. One of the, one of the things you mentioned, I don't know, do you have to go right this second? Are you about to hit a minute? You're last in the day. Pretty soon people are going to figure out ways to game, even my little system. I, they're already starting on what I'm watching that, but go ahead. But you you've mentioned in the past that an interest in kind of a explore maybe four more formal ways of like doing some education and things with your channel. And I don't know. It's always occurred to me that you could, you could implement something like Jordan Peterson's online university in like a much more like badly done way, but just using YouTube, you know, in terms of like, here's some, here's, I'm going to throw out some content here and your assignment is to go, you know, make a Google doc that, you know, summarizes this and you know, kind of, and then, and then comment on everybody else's or make your own video and comment on people's videos and just, just act as like so that your time isn't, you know, taken up too much, but other people are kind of acting as that feedback mechanism within the community itself. And really all you're doing is providing a locus or a center for them to have the conversation around, but they're kind of providing all the feedback to each other. And then maybe you bubble up some of the best bits of that activity, you know, you just as a highlight here or there, but, but really the system's kind of self-sustaining in a certain sense by, by the community having these conversations with one another. It's just something that I've thought, you know, I think it's a cool idea. Yeah. I think that the, the challenge that I face is I'm, I'm at this point, I'm putting about as much time into this as I dare. And that's always in competition with obviously my local ministry, which when someone from there still is a hierarchy. And when someone from my church calls, I answer. And you know, I will usually, if I, you know, I will probably bump, you know, YouTube callers by prioritizing church callers. And I think that's the way the hierarchy should be. I've got, I think if you were to do that, I think within your community, there's enough people that probably would volunteer to take on, you know, some of the structure bearing elements of that, of that, uh, extra requirement. Yeah, I think so. I, I've, so there's another, there's an education thing that I was doing for a while and it's, I'm still doing sort of, it's called Sierra leadership network where I, it's, I do once a month, I'll do a chat with about two hour chat with about six or eight people online. And I'll go through through, through theology and some of that. And I, I, earlier days I had run that program with assignments and, and all kinds of things. And it was a good, it was a good program. And now, now actually, obviously with the bigger circle, I could probably do more, but I, I'd have to figure out. So I would have to cut something and probably what would get cut would be conversations like these. And so it's, it's already, because as I, you know, so I'm going to have a conversation this week with a guy who has another channel dedicated to young. I'm probably going to have a conversation with Ron Dart this week. I want to do some denominational things. I I've got so many ideas in my head of what I'd love to do that. And then I think, okay, well, you know, who knows, maybe someday I'll do this more time than I'm doing now. But if I did that, I wouldn't also be pastoring as much. And that would also impact me. And so it's all these trade offs in terms of time and energy. So that's it, but it's a great idea. It's a great idea. Yeah. I think for it to be, for it to work, it would have to be decentralized. It could not be again, like most of the, the work of it would have to be kind of spread across the community. And I know coming up with the, with ways to do that effectively is kind of challenging, but I think it's something that you could, you could do badly. And you know, it still have some value coming. There's, there'd be something, you know, worth learning coming out of that. No, I think so too. I think it's a great idea. So, so what do you do for work? I'm a, I work in the tech space. So I, I'm actually working sales. My background is more technical, but I work in like a for a cyber security company that and I do, I'm like what's known as a sales engineer. So I'm like, I'm in the sales, the pre-sales activity, but I'm more, you know, trying to help do things like proof of concepts and evaluations and, you know, demonstrations of how the product works and those sorts of things. Okay. Okay. So it, but many of the people who, I mean, tech, artists, math people, math students and a lot of math students, it's very interesting, but obviously long form YouTube people who can have the time in their life to do this. So, yeah. And yeah, it's weird. I use, I use zoom every day for work to count sales calls. So it's funny. I don't know. I'm on it for just talking to you. It's been so strange. Well, Michael, this has been, this has been a lot of fun. And I, I certainly, I'm certainly grateful that you shared your story like this. And you know, if we post it, I think others will be blessed by it. And yeah, but this has been, this has been lovely. And I love your, I love your, I love that you're looking at Owen Barfield. Interesting, interesting guy. You know, that's part of it too. There's so many, so many books I want to read now. And it's like, it's all, time is this, time is this horrible thing. And I'm a pretty efficient guy. I mean, I really do try to squeeze as much out of a lot of time as I can without getting tyrannical, but it's, I think that's what's so helpful to me too, about your channel is that you, you compress quite a bit in terms of like what you've already digested. And so it's really helpful. But then then there's certain areas that kind of gleam out of those compressions where like, I want to go really dig into that and expand it out. It's so helpful that, that you kind of, you do that. And it's, it's brought me down all these different paths. And you know, I'd say, you know, I, I probably watch you more than anybody else just because you pull from so many different areas and you pull them all together into like a kind of, and you're trying to pull them all into a unified whole, which is really ambitious and it's, it's fun to watch cause it's not easy. It's probably overly ambitious. But that's, that's kind of, I think that's, I think a lot of the people that you attract have that kind of same idealism to try and like, I know this is impossible, but theoretically it would be possible, you know, and to be really cool if we, you know, the, the more we can do it, it's really cool because you want, and that's what I think about the age to come. I think of conversations where you get these people together and you know, it's, it might be fun listening to CS Lewis, you know, reading an account of CS Lewis and Owen Barfield's great war, but you have to imagine that in glory, the war continues and, and you know, there's, they don't have the kind of time constraints we have, I would imagine. And so that's, that's just an incredible, for me, that's an incredibly, that brings that joy wells up when I imagine the possibilities of what that looks like. And when I feel that joy, the kind of, the kind of unbelief that says, you know, Oh, death is, death is when there's nothing. And I think, Oh, that's, that's, that's, if that's the truth, that's so utterly sad compared to what I can imagine could be so much better. And that's just my little head imagining. So, anyway, well, Michael, this has been great. Yeah. I will send you a copy of this video and we can decide what to do with it. Perfect. Thanks again for your time. I really appreciate it. Okay. Thanks, Michael. It's been a delight. Take care. Bye bye.