https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=5zW03a4t2Uo

 What does Jordan Peterson think about institutional racism? Let's listen. Yeah, thanks for your talk. I'd like to find out from you. What's your view of institutional racism? Is it a thing or is it some other left radical leftist agenda? What was your view of institutional racism or systematic racism as some people may call it? Institutional system? Yes, yes. Is it a thing? Is it an actual thing? That's a great question. Is it some other agenda that you might attribute to radical leftists? It's a multivariate problem. No society is without its biases and prejudices. And some of them get built into the systems themselves. And so when you look at unequal outcomes and you're trying to discover why those unequal outcomes exist, if you have any sense, then you do a multivariate analysis and you put in prejudice and discrimination as one of the factors. One of the factors. One of many, many factors. And the problem with the radical leftists is that they take the fact that societal structures are tyrannical to some degree and arbitrary, which of course they are because they're imperfect, and then they obliterate the rest of the complexity with that claim. So there's lots of reasons for inequality. Systemic bias is one of them. It's an open question to what degree systemic bias plays in the inequality problem, let's say. But it's something that we could hypothetically address with a certain degree of detachment and intelligence. So no system is perfect. Not, and certainly not a reasonable answer. Okay, that's wise. Now for me, again, if you watch my video on the Divine Lobster, I had someone have asked about this. This is Bucko the Lobster. Bucko is our mascot for our Sacramento Jordan Peterson meetup. And if you go to the simulation event in San Francisco, actually this was purchased by Vlado, my friend from the meetup. And he saved a couple of seats for me and my son Jared, and we sat right in front of Peterson and Vlado kept waving the lobster. So that's Bucko the Lobster. I also have a really cool Jordan Peterson poster over here from my friend Rick. And now Bucko doesn't want to stay. Okay. But so in the Divine Lobster, I tell a lot of my back story. I grew up in Patterson, New Jersey. My father helped take kind of a rescue mission and turn it into a church. And this happened during the racial reconciliation era, the civil rights movement. And the church was a beautiful blend, Northside Chapel. It was a beautiful blend of some of the best of the Dutch CRC community in New Jersey. And some wonderful people who decided to have a different kind of church experience than one of the, say, large black churches in the neighborhood. And that was how I grew up. And so the civil rights movement for me was bred into my bones from the beginning. And now a lot of people are attacking Jordan Peterson because, you know, he is not lining up and reciting the liturgy of the temple of the ascendant morality on the left. And if you're not citing the liturgy, you are therefore an outsider. And this is why the previous video I did on religion. All of life is religious. We are religious beings. And we work out religion. And it may or may not have anything overtly to do with God or anything like that. But the civil religion of the ascendant left is a religion. And there is a dogma. And if you are a heretic, you will be attacked with all the ferocity that you might get kicked out of a church. But here's the thing. In the United States, we have the separation of the establishment clause where the government can't set up a church. But what happens when the government itself becomes religious in another way? This is a problem. And so even though from the depths of my heart, I know racism is a horrible, terrible, dangerous, awful sin that has brought incredible suffering into generations of people all over the world. But racism is different in every place. When I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic, there was plenty of racism in the Dominican Republic. But it looked different than racism in North America. And I believe, I'm a Calvinist, I believe we are all sinners. We're not as bad as we could be. But every aspect of our life misses the mark. And all of us, I think, down to our core are contaminated by racism. I don't think that can be helped. From the time you were born, your brain, you had to develop biases so you could filter out way too much information that we have. And so you filter out. So you have to become biasism. Without those biases, we can't think. And racism is one of those biases. And institutional racism, I believe in institutional racism. Racism gets into institutions and corrupts it. And as Peterson says, all institutions have their tyrannical element. If they didn't have a tyrannical element, they couldn't function as institutions. And this is why in churches, there's always this tension between the organic church and the institutional church. Because there's always a degree of tyranny. You need that tyranny, in a sense, to have some of that discipline to actually be able to have structure and formation. And so racism gets into institutions. And institutions have to figure out how to deal with that racism. Now, late last week, Saturday, I wrote a blog post that probably hasn't gotten passed around too much, but I knew it would also get me into trouble. You know, as GK Chesterton said, you know, I like getting into hot water. It gets me clean. And I wrote a thing about racism as the big sin. And I think if we elevate racism to the big sin, we give ourselves passes on all kinds of other sins. I don't know that there can be the big sin. There might be the big sin for a given individual in terms of their majority sin. But once you take an elephant, an elephant, once you take an element and define it as the whole thing, you have even taken a sin and turned it into some kind of weird idolatry. And that is, to a degree, what has happened. And as Peterson says here, there's a, if you want to address racism, you have to look at it in a broader way. Now, let's go back and listen to it. This is a very big deal for me because, you know, some of the hits that I've taken and started this Peterson project is people are thinking, well, you know, Paul used to line up and say all the right things about racism. And now he's not standing up and confessing the liturgy in the way he needs to. But people know me and they know my relationships and they know my life. So they look at me and say, but I don't think he's a racist because if you were a racist, his life wouldn't look like it is. But he's not lining up with everyone else in terms of not only their dogma, but the expressions of their dogma and the prescribed expressions of their dogma. This is the worst kind of religion that we are doing. And what's really dangerous is when this stuff, when the government uses this, this is exactly what the establishment cause was designed to prevent. But what happens when you have, well, this goes back to the first question about religion that I just did the video on. If you define religion poorly, you're going to miss the secularized versions of religions. And again, now Peterson has these ideas that ideologies are stupid religions. They're not fully formed because a good religion looks at both sides of things and is well formed. It's been molded through time and there's balance within it. And ideology is a crippled religion. It's off balance. So now I've been talking so much, maybe I've forgotten exactly where I started here, but this isn't a long question. Is it a thing? Is this an actual thing? And just by listening to his accent, seems to be an African immigrant. And one of the interesting things that's happened in terms of, so I grew up deep within the African community, African American community, deeper within the black community. And one of the things that if, especially if you're a child within another culture and within another community, you're treated differently as a child. People will say things in front of you they won't say in front of a white adult. And so this is how I grew up and I heard all of the conversations about, you know, get your black ass over here or you're passing for all the different conversations that go on within the black community. I was a child. I heard all of that. I absorbed all of that. And I was, you know, I was welcomed within that community as one of theirs. And so to me, I mean, these are, I mean, these are my family. But racism is so much more complicated and it's in all of us. It's deeply embedded. So is institutional racism a thing? And now part of my frustration with a lot of the little soundbite clickbait promotion of Jordan Peterson and all these tiny little chopped up videos is that, you know, a racist will, racist, someone with a racist agenda or a white supremacist agenda will take a little soundbite from Peterson, write a clickbaity thing and put that out. Another person will hear that, read that, connect that with Paul VanderKlaan and say, oh, Paul's being seduced into racism. No. Is it some other agenda that you might attribute to right-wing leftists? It's a multivariate problem. It's a multivariate problem. And this is exactly right. And it's never just racism. We're far too complex than that. Does race get involved? Yes. Is race sometimes the determining factor? Yeah. Scott Alexander has a terrific blog post called Against Murderism. And I'll put it in the notes if I remember. If I don't, note it in the comment that I forgot and then I'll put it in the comments. Where he says, you know, here's a problem. We're not even sure how to define racism in terms of how to engage it. And this is fundamentally my problem with a lot of how we imagine we are going to address racism in this culture. We are going to shame it out of people. And it cannot be done that way. And this is where I as a Christian minister get involved. Because you cannot shame it out of people. All you will do is make people defensive or you make people play duplicitous games between their persona and their shadow self. So their persona is purely non-racism and racism grows in the shadow. Racism cannot be dealt with in this way. It's too deep in our hearts. It goes too much to the core of our being. And the really great, terrible, dangerous sins are the ones that get implicit. And they are not easily called out. And they are not easily exposed. Because we are way too sophisticated at that. And there's too many ways to hide it. Now, one of the amazing things that the civil rights movement did was make the kinds of overt racism no longer passable in the persona of our society. You can no longer be a good person in the public sphere and say racist things. And on one level that is a really good thing. On another level that is a really dangerous thing. Because what that data would take, all that racism and shove it underground. And in a sense the problem that you have is if someone is a racist out there, just publicly so, you can talk to them about that. And I, Darryl, I forget, it's a YouTube documentary, maybe I'll think about it. A wonderful documentary where this guy who's a big musician and he goes and befriend Klansmen. And I think this is the most Christian thing you can do. Okay, now I'm upset. Jesus Christ died for racists. And if you think racism is the big sin. That when people are racist they're beyond the pale. Then you are violating your Christian profession. Because while we were still sinners, racism, pride, seven deadly sins, missing the mark, any way you wanted to find it, he died for us. Which means Jesus came for racists too. And he came for the racism in our hearts. And if we take this cause, and my deep fear is that what we're doing with this cause is actually going to make racism worse. Because now all we're paying attention to is race. We are just going to make it worse. Because that's how sin is. And one of the things that I've learned in a conservative Calvinist tradition is that sin, we will never beat sin. It is a monster beyond us. And we struggle against it our whole life. But we will never beat it. And racism is a monster we will never beat. And racism will only finally put down when, okay I'm a Christian, I'm going to give you my profession, when the Lord comes with the clouds. But if we play games with it, imagining that we can simplistically beat it by calling it out or restructuring our institutions. I'm not saying we shouldn't try to address racism that gets implicit in the system. It's a multivariate problem. And so if you make it the problem, you will not only turn a blind eye to all the other problems, but you will in fact make that problem larger. And so, you know, one of the things that I loved about Dr. King was he said, you know, if you want to fight racism, racism, you cannot hate the racist. You cannot hate the white man. You conquer him with love. And that message, when I look at the civil rights movement, they were organized, they were disciplined. They had real goals and realistic goals and they took them on one at a time. And that's leadership. But at the core of it was, you can take my life. That's what's Christian about it. You can kill me. But this is the archetypal message of Christianity. But you cannot kill my Lord. You kill him. He rises again. And so this question for me matters deeply. But I am just, I am really concerned that the way we are approaching it in society, and even some of the ways I see us approaching it in the Christian Reformed Church, we are going to make it worse because we are forgetting, at least in the Christian Reformed Church, we are forgetting our theology. We are forgetting the basic theology of what sin is and how we are with respect to it. And, you know, I will happily have a conversation and deal with institutional racism in the church, institutional racism in society, absolutely. But I do know that the simplistic, the simplistic liturgy that we are playing out of, calling out and shaming, will not do it. All it does is make us pretend. And what really gets dangerous is we start to fool ourselves. And we start to imagine, because I am calling it out, because of this, because of that, racism is no longer in my heart. Racism is the other guy's problem. No, it is always in my heart. And I know I have to deal with it. But it is not the only sin in my heart. It is not the only sin in our institutions. And it is not the only sin in our lives. And it is universal to white folks, black folks, brown folks, Asian folks. It is universal to us. And it can't be other way because of the way that we grow up and the kinds of biases we have to develop in order to navigate through life. It is a multivariate problem. Now I am all worked up. I don't know, if we can play more Peterson, sure, why not? Right. Like no society is without its biases and prejudices. And some of them get built into... That is total depravity right there. ...the systems themselves. That is total depravity right there. And so when you look at unequal outcomes and you are trying to discover why those unequal outcomes exist, if you have any sense, then you do a multivariate analysis and you put in prejudice and discrimination as one of the factors. One of the factors. One of the factors. Many, many factors. And the problem with the radical leftists is that they take the fact that societal structures are tyrannical to some degree and arbitrary, which of course they are because they are imperfect, and then they obliterate the rest of the complexity with that claim. So there is lots of reasons for inequality. Systemic bias is one of them. It is an open question to what degree systemic bias plays in the inequality problem. And saying it is an open question is not a dodge. It basically says, we don't know. So let's find out. But when we find out, we have to go in with an open mind and say, is it racism? Probably some of that. What other things are there? What other things are accounting for the outcomes we are seeing? We have to work it through. Let's say. But it is something that we could hypothetically address with a certain degree of detachment and intelligence. So no system is perfect. Not, and certainly not ours. Reasonable? Reasonable answer? Okay. That's wise. I have been wanting to say this for a long time to the Christian Form Church, to the Ascendant morality that is out there impacting everyone. We can derive a sense of self-righteousness from this so easily because it can be so resolution. And we have even made it even, you know, people of color white. Well, that is about as low resolution as you can get because now it is binary. And many of the critiques are well founded. Here is the problem with consciousness. When I say one thing, you immediately, both and. It is true. We are racist. But we cannot approach it simplistically. And we need to approach it together. And we need to talk about it. And everyone says, well, we need to have a conversation. Well, you know what a conversation is? It is going back and forth. And if you frame the conversation in a way that people cannot work through their stuff, their racist stuff, honestly, by saying offensive things, by exposing what is true in their heart. When I lead a small group, I always tell people, I want you to say what you believe even if it is heresy, even if it is unorthodox. If you really believe it in the context of a small group, you say what you think. Because unless you get it out there, we are not going to make any progress with it. And so what we have done with the race conversation is we have the higher you raise that shame level, the deeper underground the reality goes. And the deeper underground the reality goes, the less you are going to be able to deal with this. And we know this about so many other things in the church. We know that shame is so often counterproductive to process. So please, let's back off this. And stop trying to use this tool to address racism, because it's just going to make it worse.