https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8qo9aU6NwQU

 Other takers, huh, Paul? Wow, I'll talk, I got some, I had another CRC minister that I wanted to get in, but he couldn't do it either. It's this time of year is hard on clergy. So welcome and body. This is, hi, this is Paul. And we have a really special live stream today for a while now, especially the Roman Catholics in our midst have been pestering me to get Larry Chap on the channel. And when this same sex blessings thing came down, I thought, I don't know what to think about this. So first I grabbed Cale. Now a lot of people complain because they say, well, why isn't father Eric on here? And my reason is father Eric is a young priest and I'm not gonna put him in a position to say something that's gonna in any way impact. I mean, I'm an old guy, Larry's an old guy, Cale is getting older. So we can- I'm retired and I'm retired. I don't have to worry about anybody firing me. That's right. So that's why father Eric is not here. I love father Eric and I respect him as the day is long, but I respect him and love him so much. I'm not gonna put him in an awkward position. That's right. So that's why father Eric is usually not on these chats where we go into stuff about the church. Now, unfortunately I haven't done my due diligence to get Larry on for a Randos conversation. He doesn't even know what a Randos conversation is. That's right. He doesn't even know what my channel is. So he didn't know anything about this corner. So he is getting baptized here into the corner this morning. But so I have to do some due diligence by Larry. One of the things that my channel started, I started this YouTube channel talking about Jordan Peterson. I had all these people who wanted to talk to me. And because I'm a pastor, I was talking to a lot of people offline and then I was recognizing there was a fair amount of repetition coming on. So then I started recording some of the conversations with permission and sharing them on the channel. And that just made it all go further. So I do on my channel, there's a significant number of people who are, they come to the channel that sort of created an online community because there's a whole bunch of people who are known. And usually what I do is I do an hour or two with people just about their life. Now we don't have that kind of time today, but I do want to get a little bit of background on you. In fact, more than a little bit as usually. Tell me Larry about the household that you grew up in. Did you grow up a cradle Catholic? Yeah, I'm cradle Catholic. I grew up in Lincoln, Nebraska. And my father was a fireman. My mother was a stay at home mother. I had four other siblings. It was a typical sort of 1960s late baby boom generation, a very middle-class, very suburban, very typical modern Midwestern American. And so we were cradle, I was cradle Catholic, but my family's Catholicism was very lukewarm. I don't think my parents should mind me saying that now. We got catechized. We didn't go to Catholic school. We went to catechism, got the sacraments, but pretty much religion was not emphasized at home at all. So it was a pretty standard thing. And I pretty much through most of my youth thought religion was just a gigantic colossal bore, something that just endure until the day when I could just walk away from it all. But then I was kind of an egg-hitty intellectual kind of kid. And so I was into big ideas and big things, science and philosophy and literature and stuff. So I started reading my way back into Catholicism. It was started reading mere Christianity by Lewis. He turned me onto GK Chesterton. Chesterton turned me onto Cardinal Newman. And then all of a sudden I'm back into the Catholic fold and thinking like, then off to seminary I went, decided not to be a priest, got a PhD at Fordham University, then job at DeSales University in Allentown, Pennsylvania in 1994, retired from that in 2013. Now I run a Catholic worker farm. There, there's my life. Wow, that was fast. And that's way too fast for me. So I have more questions. I have more questions. Tell me about a career in Catholic academia. What was that like? Well, for me, and I can only speak for myself since I was teaching at a small Catholic liberal arts school in the Lehigh Valley near Allentown, Pennsylvania. It was a sort of middle of the road school in terms of Catholic identity, neither woke or progressive or whatever you wanna call it, nor super conservative Catholicism where every professor was Catholic and all the students were these self-identical. No, it was kind of a middle of the road sort of place, kind of like the Catholicism I grew up with. So it felt very congenial to me. And I loved it. I spent 20 years there. And the only reason I eventually quit was because I wanted to start this Catholic worker farm and it wasn't possible to do both. But I absolutely loved, I thought when I first started that I was gonna want eventually to move on and teach at an institution that had PhD students. But I discovered that I was very, very good at teaching undergraduates and that I loved teaching undergraduates and realized that was my calling in life. And so I just loved it. I got tenure and all that. But I was not happy with the broader Catholic academic world. And you might be inquiring about that. The broader Catholic theological guild from the late, from the 60s on up until today even, was dominated by liberal Catholics who thought that the Catholic church was full of it and needed to essentially become, some of your viewers might like this, essentially become more like the Protestants. You know? And Larry, what did that mean specifically? Because one of the things that I've learned living here in the corner with Paul and the gang and all these various types of Christians is that, when I was more of a ghetto Catholic, I had a kind of a very low resolution sense of what it meant to be a Protestant. And even, and so then when I started to poke around a little bit, there's all kinds of different ways. But when you, but I know exactly what you're talking about, Larry. You say you had a bunch of colleagues who wanted to quote unquote make it more Protestant. What did that mean for you? How do you sense that? Because I think this will help Paul and the audience a little bit. Well, not colleagues at the sales. I wanna be clear about that. But just colleagues in the broader theological guild. Well, what it meant to me when I would look at is, number one was an extreme de-emphasis on the sacramental priesthood. Right. That ministry needed to be less sacramentalized and more of a concept that you find in Protestantism of the minister is a kind of facilitator or a presider of worship, more of an academic thing, leading them in worshiping via the word and so on. In other words, to combat clericalism, we needed to, in a sense, attack the very notion of a priesthood. And what was being attacked too was the very notion of hierarchy. Hierarchy is bad. The pyramidal structure of the church is bad. Papal authority is bad. Dogmas are bad. All right, go ahead. So Paul, in your world, Paul, it would be more along the lines of high church, low church sort of vision, right? So it's a kind of a leveling down hyper-allegy to two-speedism into more of a congregationalist pole, right, kind of being pulled in that kind of direction. So anything that's smacked of old fashioned or vertical or hierarchical was old school. Like, let's leave this stuff behind. Let's get to the people. So you can see how it would kind of mesh then a little bit with a kind of countercultural, secular counterculturalism, right, a little bit more of a cozier relationship. I actually had more in common with high church Presbyterians, high church Anglicans, high church Lutherans and so on. So you pick your tradition, Anglican reform or Lutheran. The high church people in all of those traditions I had far more in common with than I did with the low church Catholics. I think that's a great way to put it, Cale, for the viewers and listeners to understand what the theological guild became after Vatican II was a call for the Catholic church to become a kind of low church congregationalist sort of thing. And there's in some sense, those are good. There are good qualities to that, but that's not why I'm a Catholic. To what degree is this a part of Americanization? Because it's one of the things that we talk about on this channel. I mean, Catholicism for the United States was the great enemy. They feared, of course, the French. They feared the Spanish. And so nationalism and Catholicism were, America was definitely a Protestant nation, Protestant dissenters. Catholics were to be feared, of course. Catholicism in the 19th century really starts to take off. There are, I mean, there are violent, I mean, people look at attacking African American communities. There were attacks on Catholic communities. I often remind people to that. The Klan hated three people. They hated the blacks, the Jews, and the Catholics. I mean, it's helpful to understand that this is a part of American culture too. And so especially then in the 20th century with, I would imagine, all of what's going on in Europe. And of course, the counterculture gets going that, it's not surprising that you're gonna have these tensions within the Catholic church. It's interesting that a lot of this stuff is also coming through academia and not, let's just say, through populism and sort of American culture leeching into Catholic life. So is that a part of this tension as well? Yeah, oh, it's a huge part of it. I mean, yeah, people need to remember the history of anti-Catholicism. I think it was the third Archbishop of New York City, John Hughes, they built a new convent in New York City. A vigilante group of angry Protestants burned it down. So John Hughes then advertised New York Times, said to the next Catholic institution that gets burned down, we're burning down the following Protestant institutions. Oh, jeez. And yeah, this is John Hughes, he's a Bishop of New York City. And the burnings essentially ceased at that moment because John Hughes. But that, it's kind of funny to us now in retrospect, jeez, they really took things seriously back then. But there was this legacy. And then when the immigrants, the Catholic immigrants, Irish and so forth, there was this great desire to leave all of that garbage behind, especially after World War II. And to mainstream into the dominant American culture. There's a great book by Will Herberg, called The American Way of Life, called Protestant Catholic Jew. And his argument in there is that, didn't matter what religion you were, Jewish, Protestant, Catholic, you morphed into bourgeois suburban American, which in some ways was kind of to become a kind of evangelical Protestant in some ways. There was another great book by William McLaughlin called The Great Awakenings, in which he sort of makes the case that American religion, even in its Protestant iterations, has been a kind of pan Protestant, lowest common denominator sort of thing. And I don't know if that's true, but I was always smitten with that idea. And so yeah, that plays a role. But I think that more than all of that, I think what affected the Catholic academic world was two things. It was the feminist movement and the sexual revolution. And so what was driving many Catholic theologians after the council to take on this low church persona is that they really wanted to undermine and undercut dogmatic, moral, and gender teachings within the church. They wanted women to become priests. And so we needed to attack the church teaching on that out of largely feminist sort of presuppositions that no matter what the church's sacramental theology is, the fact of the matter is not ordaining women relegates them to second class status and therefore by secular standards, they need to become priests. And then the other thing was the sexual revolution. We need the contraceptive pill. We need to start lightening up on cohabitation and things like that. And now of course homosexuality. And so we need to undermine the church's sexual teaching. And so I think, I like to say in many ways, it was a set of conclusions in search of arguments, more than anything. And the conclusions were, we need to become more mainstream American, more secular, more in tune with modern feminism and sexuality and off we went. It strikes me, Larry, just real quick, Paul, it strikes me that you talk about the conclusion in search of an argument. It's not unlike what we've been noticing in the headline in search of an article. There's a way in which the headlines are doing the work, which I think will dovetail in what we will probably get to with Paul and the rest of the live stream later on. But there's a sort of an inversion there of that process. Last week we did a live stream, actually. You very could have been on last week's live stream too, because the title of the live stream was, is American conservatism crypto-Catholic? Because I picked up an argument from Aaron Wren. Aaron Wren is a very interesting Protestant one of the few Protestants that has paid attention to the fact that I think the thesis about this sort of, because Protestants are so fractured, Protestants then tend to create these alternatives, sometimes even implicit institutions or agreements that allow Protestants to work together basically to create a spirit that will allow them to govern a society. So instead of, let's say, having, you don't have, Billy Graham is the spiritual advisor to how many presidents. You have this WASPy, America was very much driven and led by this WASPy coalition. And as you say, in the second world war, this emphasis to bring Catholics and Jews into the coalition. But what we've had really, the one of the most well-known people from my tradition, Kristen Cobes-Dume writes this book, Jesus and John Wayne. I first heard she was writing this book. I thought, oh good, someone's taking a look at this. And I looked at the book, I thought, this is not the book I was looking for. Because for me, the big news is not that people's religiosity and their nationalism get intertwined. That I simply expect. The big news is what happened to WASPy America and these elites. And then what's been interesting is how Catholics have kind of come in. And so then the group of three Protestants are talking about it. And they're basically saying, well, you know, the evangelicals who always get shot at on the news by the progressives, they're the foot soldiers. The real brains behind all of this are the Roman Catholics. And it's like, oh, well, that's interesting. And so, I mean, we were talking about that last week. And I think that does very much fit into at least the crazy thing. The thing that when Protestants look at the Roman church that is tough for us to realize is just how big and how old and how global and how massive that is. Yeah. A lot of Protestantism, especially in America, tends to be very local. And denominations are these, like my denomination, it's sort of a historical coalition, but those things don't last very long. So my denomination is a little over 150 years old. And in many ways it's breaking down and it will probably end in the next 25 years, just because a lot of what held it together were the values and the ethnicity of Dutch immigration. And so then beyond that, we sort of get absorbed into the broader non-institutional, but religious quasi-church thing. And what the Roman Catholics have actually, despite all of the drama you have within your institution, you actually have a container that gives form and shape and identity, whereas Protestants are just sort of generic Christians out there. I don't know if that sounds fair. Well, no, I think that's very fair that Catholicism has this unique thing that not even say a more bishop-oriented denomination like Anglicanism possess. We have this thing called the Pope, which allows us to have this transnational fulcrum upon which all, or hub, I think better way, all the spokes of the church revolve around this hub. And it's that hub over the past centuries that has kept the church from flying apart from the various centripetal forces that tore Protestantism apart, all right? That Protestantism had no hub. And so that would happen to any religion. It happens to every religion that doesn't have a hub. They just flies apart, and you end up with all this kaleidoscopic pluralism within it. And so Catholicism had that unique thing called the Pope. And then, of course, then the bishops on down the line and so on. That can, however, and that's all true. So your distinction is correct. That can, however, mask over the fact that in many ways the unity is merely a paper unity. That the differences run deep and profound. And like I said not too long ago, I often find that I have much more in common, both not just in theology, but in terms of how I approach the world through the eyes of faith. I have more in common with many of my Protestant friends and brothers and sisters than I do with many of my Catholic co-religionists. Right, and Paul, for me, I think that would explain my attraction to the corner, right? That I have in certain weird ways more freedom to kind of be and say and speculate and think out loud here than I would say in the theology department at Villanova. Because for all intents and purposes, and I know Sam was kind of giving me the business last Friday, tongue in cheek, of course, but what is a Catholic, right? We were talking about that last week and it's like, well, you know, there is no, it would be hard, again, I'm sort of picking on Villanova because it's just on the brain and Villanova's fine, like whatever, right? But it's not Catholic, right? In other words, I would have a hard time finding someone who would like believe in the supernatural claims of broadly speaking of the Christian faith, much less sacraments and sacramentals and demons and angels and spirits. And I mean, forget that. I mean, so all of, so much of mainstream Catholicism is really effectively no different than the kind of liberal wing of the Presbyterian church, which might explain then a little bit why you have all this wailing and gnashing of teeth about gay blessings or women in priesthood. It's because there's lots and lots of sort of like Methodist envy amongst the academic Catholic set. And I'm not just locating that in theology departments. I would say that that's largely true of, I mean, I would guess that you would have a hard time finding a practicing, you know, more than a handful of practicing Catholics in like say an English department at fill in the blank Catholic university. Wow. Less of the, I mean, you know, Larry would be able to speak to the theology guild a little bit more than I get. But in other words, it's really easy to say the sort of the Catholic name only thing. Cause like I'm not making a sort of hyperbolic joke, right? So therefore I can come here into this corner with you guys, Paul. And it's like, oh, okay. I can like actually talk about Jesus. Like I can actually talk about miracles. I can talk about, you know, these kinds of things. Go ahead, Larry. No, I didn't mean to cut you off. I just wanted to, I'm a cheerleader here. So go ahead and finish. You know, so the, you know, you talk a lot, Paul, about the, you know, sort of the breakdown of the iron box of modernism, right? Well, in many respects, almost every Catholic institution in this country lives and moves in the iron box of modernism. Absolutely. I was going to say that the dividing line is no longer so much, I think, along old fashioned reformation, confessional lines, you know, all the various solas, all the scriptural verses, tradition, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Okay, those are all still important theological things that we can discuss in ecumenical dialogue. Poop-de-doo. The real crisis is a crisis of truth. And Pope Benedict, Joseph Ratzinger, constantly emphasizes it's a crisis of truth. And so the great divide is no longer between Protestant Catholic. The great divide is amongst Protestants and Catholics between the idea that revelation brings us objective truths about God that are non-negotiable or the bedrocks of our faith, that even though the dogmatic expressions thereof are historically conditioned somewhat, there is an objectivity to them that transcends time, history, and subjectivity. There is truth, and that truth is the truth of Christ revealed to us in God in his scriptures. And then we argue about, okay, how do we do that? But the bottom line is we agree. There is an objective truth about God communicated through Christ, and then the dogmas of Trinity and Christology, and so that is opposed to a modernist understanding that all of that's up for grabs. All of it, because it's all historically conditioned. All of it is subjectivist. And now therefore we need to engage in these theologies of experience, where instead of beginning with Christ in scripture and revelation, we begin with cultural pluralism and subjectivity and my identity, and so you end up with queer theology and feminist theology and indigenous theology. And what you then is reconstruct Christianity in the image of those experiences. And there's no such thing as objective truth beyond the projections of the individual. And that's an utterly modernist, Carl Truman in his book on the therapeutic self, the imperial self. This is the truth that he was getting. Great book, by the way, if you're a viewer, you probably are very familiar with it. Carl Truman, of course, is not a stranger to reform theology. Exactly, and so that's my point. I am more in common with Carl and his vision of Christianity vis-a-vis the prophetic needs of our time than I do with most people in the Catholic Theological Guild. Now, Father Eric, even though I haven't invited him on the screen, he is making comments in here and so I certainly won't ban him from the comments. Somebody should let Larry know we don't like the term objective around here now. Explain that, Paul. Well, and that's because a lot of what's sort of, I mean, whenever Cale talks about the corner or this little corner, that's sort of become shorthand for this strange little movement that we have that sort of got kicked off by Jordan Peterson, the work of Jonathan Peugeot, an unorthodox icon carver, John Vervecky, a non-theist, cognitive science, who was a colleague of Jordan's at, I mean, a lot of our conversations here have been sort of a desire to get beyond sort of the modernist fundamentalist fight, which of course was deep in many, many Protestant theological, I mean, the Christian Reformed Church, we're currently having a battle over same-sex marriage right now and the conservatives have pretty decisively won and the progressives who have had the, who have been the elites in the denomination for 70 years are now in a place that they have no idea what to do with because they have been building all of these institutions, owning all of these institutions, and they're now realizing that the conservatives are ready to enforce subscription on matters like traditional sexuality and they are gonna find themselves locked out of all of the institutions they have been carefully cultivating for 70 years. I mean, that's what's happening in the Christian Reformed Church now. Now, one way to look at that, and most of the Christian Reformed progressive elites who are now about your age and my age, a lot of the older crew, they see this battle, they tend to see this battle through the lens of the modernist fundamentalist fight and they are sort of on the modernist side and they point fingers to all of the conservatives that they are fundamentalists and there certainly is that valence going on in the Christian Reformed Church. What has been happening in this little corner of the internet has been not so much a framing. It's sort of followed the phenomenology all the way through into a neo-sacramentalism that basically says that on the other side of the modernist fundamentalist fight, there is the recognition that a lot of this traditionalism, there was a phenomenology baked into the ancient world that was essential for human habitation and human thriving and that the, and obviously this causes a big tremors within Protestantism, which of course was right there at this great break, which gave birth to the enlightenment and modernism and all of that. I mean, Protestantism and modernism in some ways can be seen as quite synonymous, but now we have this movement where, for example, when I came to Sacramento, I came to pastor the oldest of our Sacramento churches on our denomination because Sacramento was a growing city. We started planting new churches and when we started planting churches in the 90s, we were using sort of Bill Hybels, Big Box, Seeker, Methodology and one of the interesting things is that all of these churches that we planted over the last 20 years have gone from sort of a big stage, big sound, sort of traditional Protestant revival conversionist ethos into liturgical calendars, more sacraments, I mean, that's kind of been the split that's happening and so one of the things that, and so it's funny because in the Christian Reformed Church, and we're getting closer to what the title of this is, many who had been sort of following the modernist fundamentalist, but tracking with the modernist basically said, of course the turn to embrace same sex marriage and this new understanding of human sexuality as you sort of frame from an experiential, the other side that is merging is also sort of has a focus on the phenomenology and the experiential, but in a very different way that has in some ways become a new form of conservatism. So I mean, that's sort of where this very strange little thing that's been growing over here has been tracking. Yeah, it's very interesting because it tracks very, as soon as the word objective came out of my mouth, of course, little alarm bells went off because that does conjure up an image of a kind of false Archimedean objectivity that floats above time and history. But it is a convenient shorthand with regard to emphases and a lot depends on how you conceive of objectivity, of course. Now, a lot of this mirrors the current debates in the Catholic Church between radical modernist progressives and radical traditionalists, all right, who are kind of our fundamentalists, who have these sets of fundamentals that we all have to adhere to in this very rigorous way or else you're not really a Catholic. Look all the way back to the Council of Constance and Aquinas and yeah, see, they said XYZ here and so that's what we still have to think. Okay, so we have that debate too. Now the theological school out of which I move is the same theological that Pope John Paul, Pope Benedict and it was called the Réseau Small, French term, in the middle of the 20th century, return to the sources. Let's get back to scripture, the church fathers, Aquinas and others, let's see the entirety of the tradition in a bigger picture. And part of that bigger picture was take and that's really what motivated the Second Vatican, Council and so forth. Part of that big picture is precisely rooting objectivity and subjectivity and vice versa, grounded in the history and vice versa, which requires a turn and we saw this in Pope John Paul, a return, a turn towards certain phenomenological methods of philosophical discourse. We're not leaving sort of Thomistic metaphysics behind, but we are now going to incorporate notions of experience that get phenomenologically analyzed, both theologically from one of the lens of faith and philosophically, in order to construct, in a sense, orthodoxy from below, which is possible. So you nailed it on the head. I think the allure of a Jordan Peterson and some others that I could name, is that they're coming at this in a sense from a discipline not even related to theology, in this case, psychology, okay? And just starting with a fundamental analysis of how people are experiencing the world themselves, they're constructing in a sense, a fairly Christian orthodox worldview out of that. And so we do need to see these two things coming together. The guy I did my doctorate dissertation on Hans Urs von Balthasar was a Swiss Catholic theologian, very familiar with Karl Barth, the Protestant reform theologian. And Balthasar's whole point was that, what you said, it's very sacramental, that Christ presents us with a gestalt, a form, an aesthetic, and that form has very much an objectivity, like art has an objectivity, that then provokes from within us a certain subjective response that then has to be taken into consideration. But anyway, I don't wanna go into big academic dissertation here, but go ahead, Kev. But one of the things, this is great, so like one of the things that people talk about here is this sort of, we're seeing visions of things that emanate from a top and things that emerge from underneath. And there's this sort of interesting meeting ground between these two things. And so I'm fascinated about what you're talking about with von Balthasar, and then you're seeing what Peterson, just starting with the phenomena, what are the things themselves, or back to the things, right? And I think that's really important here because the sort of the leftish modernists and the rightish modernists seem to ignore all of that, the upper and the lower registers, right? And I know this is a word that's gonna trigger you, Paul, but both of them tend to be very literal. And I'm using that magic word on purpose because we don't like to say literal here, we like to say real or actual, but I mean it, right? I think for physical, right? That the modern, the leftish and the rightish modernists all play on the level of the letter. And it hinges really on that. And what I don't understand, and maybe, Larry, you might have to say something and say, why didn't the left, I know why the conservatives didn't get blown away by this, why didn't the left side of that equation get destroyed by Derrida and the rest of the post-structuralists? It's interesting to me. It's easy, sex. Okay, okay. Sex, because the one thing that post-moderns are not really that post-modern about is that they buy into the modern world's view of sex and the rights to sex and so on. That's my view anyway. That's interesting, okay, yeah, that's cool. That they don't take their deconstruction far enough. But anyway, I like your idea though, because ironically, I think both Protestant like fundamentalists and Catholic radical traditionalists have a relatively modernist understanding of truth. Absolutely. Okay, that if they buy into this enlightenment concept of a fact value distinction of objective, subjective, so if something is objectively true, then subjectivity doesn't count. And if something is subjectively constructed, then obviously it has no objective reality beyond the mind. And so you end up with either liberal liberals or conservative liberals. And so what breaks down in post-modernism is that entire fact values distinction is attacked. And love becomes veiled lust, justice becomes veiled revenge, truth becomes veiled power and so on. And you get all of these various deconstructions, which is why we are now left with nothing than the flotsam and gentzam of a vulcanized universe of various atomized identities, all fighting in the public square for their pound of flesh. Now, I do think though that to play in that sandbox is both dangerous, but almost somewhat necessary for modern day evangelists. Okay, so what we have to show, part of the problem with theologies of experience is precisely that some experiences are more privileged than others, it seems. Okay, so there's already, we have to do a hermeneutic of the process of selectivity with regard to whatever filters are being used to say, well, these are the privileged experiences and these ones are not. And so take the issue of same sex blessings. The presumption among many of the Catholic supporters of this is that, well, that's clearly the compassionate thing to do, because otherwise it's going against the gay experience of their own sexuality. We can learn from them about their, we need to respect that, except that ignores the fact that there are millions of Catholic homosexuals or maybe tens of thousands, I don't know the exact numbers, who actually don't want to engage in the LGBTQ subculture, who do view homosexual sexual relations as spiritually toxic, as sinful, as something to be avoided. And many of them do try to live Christianly chased lives, only now to be thrown under the bus by a church that says, you know what, your experience doesn't count, because now they use the language of the postmoderns. You've simply imbibed the ideology of your oppressors. You are a self-loathing homosexual because you have taken in hetero normativity, hook, line, and sinker, and you need re-education, brother. You need to come out of your Plato's cave and see the light. And to be who you really are, right? And be who you are, and we're here to help you be who you are. So then all of a sudden, you then you've got the specter of trying to figure out, okay, whose experience are we talking about here? And what is experience after all? And what counts as a movement of the Holy Spirit within that experience? These are all questions that go largely unanswered. And what happens simply is that the normativity of secular values, whatever the mood of the social contract is at the current moment, that becomes the determinative filter as to what experiences count and which ones don't. And that's precisely what we're seeing right now in the Catholic church with this huge debate over same-sex blessings. Now, before we get into the content itself, these are three notes from the guy I wanted to have on, another Christian informed minister, friend of mine. And he brings up point number one. He says, to me, this feels like PR cover. The Roman Catholic, this is another Christian for a minister who wrote this. Roman Catholic refuses to deal with misbehaving priests and higher up who looked the other way or perpetuated the crimes themselves. But now all the PR is about some inclusive future that will never happen. Edward Bernays would be proud. One of the things that I noted too was if a liberal Episcopalian came out with, oh, we're going to do same-sex blessings, they would be decried a bigot because why not full? So part of what, and also for many people, so as a local church pastor, someone comes up to me and says, oh, what kind of a church are you? And back in the day when I was fresh into America, I'd use words like Protestant only, of course, to see, okay, they don't know that word. Because we started at Christian Reformed and it was sort of all over the place. So for many people, people will call me father. I'll say, oh, I'm a minister. I'm not a priest. And of course, that distinction is nowhere seen. So let's first talk about blessing because one of the things that I see immediately is that, oh, in a Roman Catholic context, I mean, there's never been a, I received no training from my theological education on blessing. What in the Christian Reformed Church would be, well, we're going to say a blessing for a meal. Blessing is basically a prayer. And of course, it's not looked at, but that's of course couched within the tradition Protestants, sort of their assumed understanding of prayer. But right away, when I got this, I thought, let's, talking to my Protestant friends, before you rush in basically with your very low resolution on further again, based on my polarity and the culture war, you have to understand that in a sacramental universe, something coming down from the hierarchy, prescribing in great detail what a blessing is and who can be blessed and what those blessings mean, that is a whole other valence in a deeply sacramental tradition. So maybe you guys can flesh that out a bit because that's not a, I mean, obviously there's sort of the payload in a culture war that this thing delivered to American papers. But before we get there, I want to at least have, not be totally clueless about, what on earth are we talking about? And Larry, you can hit this, but in also what would be the difference between like say, Kales Elden, offering a blessing versus what does it mean in our world when a priest or a bishop or a cardinal or a Pope offers a blessing? Oh, there's so many interesting things all packed in there. One has to ask, since priests have always been allowed to bless sinners, they do it in the confessional all the time or just anybody who, hey, father, can you bless old altar boy, just run up in the street. Yeah, the priests have always been able to bless sinful individuals who approached him and said, help me father, I'm a sinner and just put God's blessing on me so I can do better. I mean, that's got gospel warrant, right? When Lord, I am not worthy that you even under under my roof, but only say the word and so on, that kind of thing. But so this document seems to be going beyond that. And it seems to be going out of its way to say, okay, now we're gonna add a new kind of blessing. All right, and the viewers need to know this, all right, that there's a new blessing in town that the doctrine for the doctrine of faith has suddenly discovered. And this new blessing is called a blessing of mercy. It's not a blessing of repentance where you're actually asking people before you bless them, express repentance for your sins, and I will gladly pray over you for conversion and the grace of God to help you overcome your sins. No, this is you're in your sin and God loves you as you are and I'm gonna bless you anyway because God loves you as you are. And I'm not gonna call you out of your repentance because that would be judgmental. Notice the document says no moral, integrity, interrogation before the blessing is given. No, it even uses the word interrogation. You may not morally, integrity, interrogate the person you're about to bless. The presumption is we're all sinners, this is a sinner presenting themselves to you and no questions can be asked. So this is kind of a blessing of mercy instead of an old fashioned, no, the difference between just an average person blessing, you know, a lay person and a priest is that of course in the Catholic Church, and you hit it Paul, you know, the Catholic, the priest himself is a sacrament, holy orders in persona Christi who stands in the person of Christ to confect the sacraments, to perform the Eucharist. And therefore the document makes a distinction between liturgical blessings and non-liturgical blessings, sacramental blessings and non-sacramental blessings. So now we've got this new thing called a non-liturgical, non-sacramental blessing of pure mercy. And yet it flies in the face of the fact the reason why people want a priest to bless them and not a lay person is precisely because they sense the sacramental presence of the priest. A Catholic wants a priest to bless them because a Catholic perceives the full sacramental and liturgical weight of the church behind every single priestly blessing, even if that priest is simply blessing your dog or your rosary or your house, okay? That's why you have them come over and not your next door neighbor, Susie, okay? That's why. And so it flies in the face of common sense to say, oh, we're gonna have them bless same-sex couples, but they're not really liturgical blessings and they're not really blessing the union, they're just blessing these couples. What the heck is that? Well, my question immediately was, are they blessing the relationship? Because it's one thing to bless, you know, two men went up to the temple to pray, you know, Lord have mercy on me, a sinner. It's one thing to bless a person. And because of course in a Protestant church downstream of Luther, you have the priesthood of all believers that sort of, I mean, obviously these things are in play in terms of the sacramental thing. But the thing that immediately appeared to me was blessing a relationship when in fact, in at least in terms of the debate going on in the Christian Reformed Church, you know, it's the, you know, there are issues with the people, but like you said, there are always issues with everyone in the Christian, you know, we have total depravity. I can't bump into a human being and not meet a sinner with mixed motives and mixed outcomes, all of that. But you're blessing a, and that of course, in many ways, the Christian Reformed Church is the fight. You're blessing a type of relationship. And to me, you know, part of what happens in a marriage ceremony is you are asking God's blessing, certainly on the people, but the focus is on the relationship. And it seemed to me that, that I didn't understand in that because obviously there's also this other valence of the sacrality of things that Protestants and Catholics have tension on as well. Yeah, you know, there's definitely here, there's a contradiction within the document and it's a contradiction caused by the fact that it's trying to be deceptive. And I'm just gonna say it. The document really wants to green light the blessing of same-sex unions. I think that's very clear. It wouldn't have come out as a declaration unless it had something, some value added thing that it was after, that it had some goal that it really wanted to achieve. All those people out there saying, oh, this is a big nothing burger. This is just saying that it can bless sinners and we've always done that. Well, if that's all it's saying, it's a big nothing burger, then why issue the document at all? And internally, the document says, well, we're not, oh, this is not a marriage and we're not blessing the union. We're blessing element. In no way should this be confused with the blessing of a. That's right. And yet the two people are allowed to present themselves as a couple to be blessed. And it is said that what is being blessed is the positive elements in their relationship. All the relationship, right? Yeah, not the sinful bits of their relationship. We're blessing like the mutuality and nurturing and loving care while one is sick and those sorts of things. That is what we're blessing here. Okay, so then you are blessing the relationship. So now we've already split hairs between these different kinds of blessings, split hairs that nobody's gonna pay attention to. Now we're splitting hairs about what part of the relationship is getting blessed and what part is not. That's why the same Curial Office, the Dicaster, the Doctrine of the Faith in 2021 issued a document that said under Pope Francis, it said in no way, in no way can we bless these things. In no way, because you cannot differentiate between the good parts of the union and the sinful parts. It will all be taken as a whole. And that's precisely what this document now repudiates. It says, oh yeah, yeah, we can bless the good parts of the relationship. Well, and yet everybody knows and they had to know in Rome how this was gonna get spun in the press and by people like the Catholic gay activists. He's not gay, but at least in theory, Father James Martin, okay. He hasn't stated his sexuality, but he's a big LGBTQ advocate. As soon as this document hit the fan, he called the New York Times, established a photo op moment, called two of his gay friends who were married, blessed them very publicly and so on. And this is how it's being spun. And the Vatican had to know this is how it's going to be spun. So this is a long-winded way and I'm dominating the conversation of saying yes to your observation that it does seem that they are green lighting the blessing of a relationship here. I don't think there's any way around that that's what they're doing. See, and for me, this is, as a Protestant, I look at this, I read it in the paper. I see it immediately in a culture war valence. I say, okay, I understand the culture war payload of this, but I also want to understand that I don't understand a lot about this ancient massive institution that clearly even if the tiny little Christian reform church can have its own little politics and within a quarter of a million denomination that I've been in intergenerationally, I see the names and the players, et cetera, et cetera. I see this thing on the news and it's like, what sense can I make of this? I wanna pull up another quote from my friend here. Let's see. He writes his third point. It's also selfishly disastrous for conservative Protestants. We enjoy the shadow of the Roman Catholic Church. We benefited from the clear teaching of John Paul II and Benedict. A schism in the Roman Church over this will make schisms in Protestant churches even more likely, which I thought was a very interesting observation because as we started the conversation, two of the books that Cale turned me onto, so this is why I've loved all of the new relationships that I've been able to develop in this strange cyber space is getting to know Cale and Cale will often send me book recommendations. I think it was from you, Cale. I got this book recommendation on Vatican I with ultramontanism. I'm reading this history of the Catholic Church and it's like, wow, of course, never taught, learned any of this in seminary. You can see this fight with, I mean, the Protestants have had this modernism fight going on for a long time. Of course, the Catholic Church has had it too and in many ways kind of older because you were dealing with it obviously for a very long time. And so, and then Vatican II, same author, it was John O'Malley wrote it. O'Malley, you know the O'Malley books, Larry. And for me, these were just windows into all kinds of history. You know, as a Protestant, you'd hear things about Vatican II and well, and super low resolution Vatican II. Well, the Catholic Church just seemed to get a little nicer. That's great. I think that's why most Catholic things too. Wasn't that counsel about saying we don't have to do anything anymore? Right, right. I mean, that became the- It got rid of all those rules that we used to have. Right, right, right. That's the- You know, so I'm struck here though, just about, you know, the idea of a blessing, right? And I think that, you know, words are funny things, right? Or as Paul likes to say, words can be, we can use fudgy words, right? And, you know, it's one thing if I go home and I ask, you know, I'm to, hey, dad, you know, I'd like to take, you know, this, I'd like to take, you know, your daughter to the homecoming dance, right? And the dad says, you know, nods and a set. And, you know, so like, I got her father's blessing, right, to take his daughter out for a date, right? And so I think we all understand that kind of blessing, right, you know, basically it's like sort of my favor or, you know, my nod of a sense, right? But I think that where you can sort of see the flattening of the word blessing into just that meaning, right, is it's been sort of cycled through and speed run through all the various modernisms and all the various isms. But I think if we look at what Catholics have understood as blessing, you know, it is explicitly supernatural, right? That, you know, and maybe some people would accuse it of being like magic or whatnot, but the reason why me, you know, blessing the table versus father, you know, Stan blessing, you know, the thing is that in Catholic, sacramental theology, that the priest has access to confer blessing in a real way that I don't have as a non-ordained person, right, and right, Larry, please check me if, yeah. So again, it's really difficult to talk about this unless you're willing to say, you know, that there's, you know, it's sort of anti, you know, the whole Charles Taylor thing, Paul, right, you know, that it is a throwback to a world that was not buffered, but hugely porous and almost infinitely porous in its import so that like a thing can even be blessed, right, that my, you know, whatever, my tools, my whatever can be blessed, right? Water, oil. Right, right, so all these things, right, so that matter then takes on a sort of a special valence, right, so my question, you know, to, when I saw the photo op with Father James Martin and doing his thing, right, is that they must not believe that human beings are icons of the supernatural, right? They simply must not understand my body as carrying supernatural meaning, right, that the only difference between, you know, like my marriage to my wife versus, you know, Tim's marriage to Jim's marriage, right, to, you know, is that, you know, is no difference. It's effectively not different, right, that this sexed body, you know, you see before you is literally just not different than another one, right? So therefore, if there is no, if it's just stop, right, if it's just meet, then who am I to judge, right, I mean, as the famous line goes, right? And so therefore, why can't you bless Tim and Jim just like you would, you know, that you would bless Jack and Jill, right? Because you can only do so if you believe that bodies are insignificant. And therefore sex is instrumentalized, it's just part A and part B and certain- It's merely affective. It's affective at best. What's the big deal here? And yet I often say to people, you know, look, what if, you talk about irregular unions, what if a brother and a sister who were in an incestuous relationship and lived together and the priest knew about this and they presented themselves to the priest and said, hey, father, we would like you to bless us. And the priest would then rightly should, morally interrogate them, and I don't know if anybody would say that he shouldn't, and say, what exactly are you asking me to bless here? I will bless both of you as individuals or I will bless the two of you together if you promise to stop having sex with each other, right? And to repent of your incestuous, sinful relationship. And if they said, sure, we're sorry for that, we want you to bless us, then fine. But if they come forward and said, we want you to bless our relationship and he doesn't ask any questions and it's father, son, Holy Spirit, in Catholic teaching, that would be a sacrilege, almost a blasphemy because you're invoking the blessing of God upon something which is deeply and profoundly sinful and unholy. And that's what's kind of bizarre. Now, before I get all kinds of hate mail, I'm not equating gay sex with incestuous relationships. I'm using a deliberately outrageous example of a sexual union that we would all agree is sinful. Everybody would agree is sinful from a Christian point of view and say, none of us would say that a priest should bless that union. No way. So there is an implied approval here. I don't know what the stopping mechanism is for the logic of that. Yeah, I don't. Well, exactly, what is next? I'll be the jerk here. I just, I don't know, why are we drawing this arbitrary line in the sand for a brother and a sister? Because what does that matter? Because love is love after all. The heart, right. I mean, so, I mean, it's interesting, Paul, I'm not sure if you picked up on this sort of new pathway of irregular relationships. I don't know, is that something that's jumped off the page for you? Yeah, well, it did. Yeah. And of course, but your point, Kale, is really important. And thinking along the lines of, so I was finishing up my Sunday school class last week and we were in Romans 14 and 15, you have the weak and the strong. And I was thinking, and Paul is talking about, some people have special days of the week, some people will eat only vegetables, some people meat. You know, you've got the book of Daniel with some valence over that and you've got Roman, you've got all of these layers going on. But, and so then I asked to the class, I said, but, you know, also you have 1 Corinthians 8 and you have this talk about meat sacrifice to idols. But the one thing that Paul doesn't seem to change with respect to Jewish, to his inherited Jewish moral posture in the context of the Roman Empire is traditional Jewish sexuality, which was very much out of step with sexuality in the rest of the world. That sexual behavior and Christianity continues to have a very special, specific valence to it that Protestants and Catholics, we might debate about food and fasting and some of these things, but sexuality seems to have a very special place in the moral universe in Christianity. And when you come post-enlightenment to try to say, well, we're going to have what we imagine to be a filter of rationality through which we will decide what is contextual and what, you know, therefore what is Adiaphora from what is essential. I mean, sexuality has always sort of been the nub here. And that, in fact, in part of the argument I put forward to the Christian Form Church is that in fact, instead of thinking about, let's say a list of rules, because rules-based approaches tend to get difficult, I think you'd rather be better off to look at ideals. And I think actually that is one way in which a lot of the sacramental traditions better preserved because what is the ideal for human sexuality? Because if you bring things, if you deal in an economy of ideals, you can deal with that which falls short of the ideal, but you measure the institutional response and orient the institutional response with respect to the ideal rather than necessarily the rules because human reality is messy, human hearts are messy, people's lives get messy. And in this context, of course, like you said, I think you said it beautifully, every priest in a confessional is blessing sinners. That's the whole point of a blessing, that the blessing is to bring someone towards the ideal. And that, again, I think part of how the Catholics have helped Protestants in this conversation. Repentance, sinner. That's right. Your repentance, but I would bulk at one thing. I perfectly agree with what you're driving at here with regard to we're all on this graduated scale on the path of sanctification and we're all sinners. But I'm not comfortable with the language of ideals because that's an easy way to ignore the fact that what we're talking about here are commandments. These are non-negotiables. And so, yes, we have to be compassionate and forgiving of everyone who violates a commandment. And we have to be, I mean, because I have violated commandments, you have, we all have, and we all have to be endlessly forgiving of that, but they're not ideals. They're not asymptotic goals that none of us can reach. I can live a life where I don't commit adultery. That's true. I can live a life where I don't steal, lie, or murder anyone. I can live a life where I honor God and don't dishonor my mother and father. That's within our reach. That is possible. And to speak of them as ideals, I think, is to make them sound like these ethereal things that none of us can, this is what this Vatican has done over and over and over again, whether it's on so many Catholic moral theological issues and sexuality, is to treat them as ideals. None of us can reach those ideals. And therefore, unreachable. And therefore, unreachable, and therefore, we need to have this endless rolling compassion that is essentially disavowing the fact that these are commandments that the church expects you to live up to. Of course, now there's a fine line here between judgmentalism and harshness and Phariseeism and self-righteousness, and then mercy, compassion, and forgiveness. There's a tension there, absolutely. But you don't resolve that tension by simply saying, well, they're not commandments anymore. They're just ideals. Well, yeah, that gets rid of the tension already. That really gets rid of the tension, doesn't it? And I would also have one thing. I don't know how much time we have here, and I don't wanna dominate. I usually go two hours, so at some point, we'll probably get used to this. Okay, well, I don't know. At the risk of changing the topic, there was a Spanish bishop that came out today. I can't remember his name. It was reported in Catholic News Agency. And they interviewed him about this new document. And he said, okay, I have issues with it and so on, but it is from the Holy Father. But what he said was very interesting. And some of you viewers may not know why this is interesting. But he said, I wish, however, on a matter of such great pastoral importance that affects the entire worldwide church on a matter of great sensitivity and contentiousness, that the Holy Father and the Vatican had consulted the bishops of the world on this topic first. But they didn't. And he used the word synodal, that the Pope had been more synodal in his approach, because Pope Francis, for the past two years, has been pushing a more synodal and less Roman centralized church. You should flesh that out a little bit, because people don't even know it. Yeah, well, okay. Going back to this idea that the Pope is some sort of monarch and potentate, every Protestant stereotype ever used against Catholics and Protestant Catholic, that the Pope is just sort of oracle in the Tiber, gets an idea every day, and this is now revelation, is sort of coming true here in some ways in this papacy, whereas the idea has never been, go back to Cardinal Newman and others, the idea has never been that the Pope is just this free-floating oracle that hovers above scripture and tradition and everything, and can just make stuff, I use stronger language, but make stuff up as he goes along, and therefore now that's the new teaching of the church. He's not supposed to do that. And so Pope Francis himself has been saying, we need less and less and less focus on the Pope. There's too much cult of personality around the Pope, too many decisions in the church being made by the Pope. Let's decentralize. Let's have a synodal church, a localist church, where local bishops and local Episcopal synods have greater voice, greater power. So we just had this Synod on Synodality in October in Rome. I covered it for various publications. And the whole thing was about, we need to be a listening church. We need to be a church that goes out to the peripheries. We need to be a church that listens to experience. Pope used a term, parhesia, which means endless openness. Nobody can be judged in the dialogue. Everybody can say whatever they wanna say. And that's all in the interest of making sure that we now have this church where decisions are made on a more grassroots level and so on. And then to have that entire, and right after this Synod, two months after that Synod, the Pope comes out with this document without consulting anyone. By the way, this issue of same-sex blessings was supposed to have been discussed at the Synod on Synodality in October. And it was discussed a little bit, but the final concluding document didn't even mention it, didn't even bring it up, because the African bishops didn't want it brought up. Many Italian and American bishops did not want it brought up. And so the people who forged the final document on the Synod had to leave all the LGBTQ stuff out, which really angered the progressives. So in other words, when the Synod met, and all these bishops from around the world and lay representatives met, they in a sense said, we don't want all this stuff. And two months after this, after all this emphasis on Synodality and local decision-making and consultation, the Pope just unilaterally, on his own authority, issues this pastoral directive that affects everyone around the world without consultation. That is the height. It's hypocritical in the extreme. It's very hypocritical. And at the end of the tag, right before the final blessing of the document, ironically, these are the words that were left with Paul. Thus, beyond the guidance provided above, no further response should be expected about possible ways to regulate details or practicalities regarding blessings of this type. Yeah, yeah, no, exactly. No further clarification. Thank you, you did the right scared jump. Like what is that? I mean, in the hypocrisy, I think that Larry Fairley says, but the height of irony at the very least for this pontificate to sort of hang its entire sort of reputation on a new way of being church. Right now, you might catch some very evangelical words, right, Paul? Yeah, the sort of the neologisms, right? But of a new way of being church, a new synodal way, and to have that be the sort of the tag on this document, which everybody knows, which is literally not even 48 hours later, we're seeing all of the fallout all over the place in an unprecedented fashion. I mean, you have entire, you know, all of the bishops conferences of the entire continent of Africa are like, yeah, no. You know, you have, you know, and it's not just the Africans that we're not, you know, and this is an unprecedented governing- The Ukrainian Catholics said no. That's right. You know, this is an unprecedented governing crisis in the church. It's really hard to understate how bonkers this is because that, you know, all of the practical questions arise. So what do you do? So your interlocutor, Paul, the point one was something about PR. You know, if you want to flash that back up on the screen, you know, I think he's right, you know, that there's some sort of PR problem going on and cover because how do you deal with misbehaving priests? And actually, what does it actually mean to be a misbehaving priest in this context? So I'll give you two quick examples, right? Let's say that I'm a sympathetic priest in a diocese that is not terribly sympathetic to this sort of thing. So, you know, a gay couple comes to me and they ask for blessing and I want to give it. Am I in trouble because my bishop says, we're not playing this game in this or flip it around? I'm in a more, you know, open type type type church, diocese, and, you know, but it very clearly states in this document that I'm not the blessed same sex relationships. And so I refuse to do it. Now am I in some kind of hot water? And then legally speaking, where does this put Catholic schools? Where does this put the chance re's? Where does this put all kinds of things are maybe the unintended consequences of a document that is, you know, official, it's official. I'm not arguing with it's sort of power, I guess, I don't know. But that the Spanish bishop that Larry invokes here says, you know, God, you could have like, you know, if you want us, what is the, there's a famous line from Casper Weinberger, you know, it's something along the lines of, look, if you want me to be part of the landing, please make sure that I'm part of the takeoff. And boy, this really seems like an instance in which no one was really consulted beyond a very small coterie of consultants. And boy, it's good, it's blown up. The word that's come out too is that very few people from within Cardinal Fernandez's own office in Rome knew that this document was coming. It seems to have been written almost exclusively by Cardinal Fernandez, who just sort of- He's the head of the DDF, Paul, which is basically, he's the head of the theological doctrinal office of the papacy. Look, yeah, and to understand this in a nutshell, to understand what's really going on here, okay? So the whole history of the papacy over the past, say, 200 years can be boiled down to a simple sort of metaphor here, that the papacy has been in a struggle against the centrifugal forces of the world that are threatening to tear the church apart. So the pope has always viewed himself for the past 200 years as a centripetal force, bringing the church together, holding the church together. So then you see the rise of the modernist movement from within the church, and you see that centripetal force of the papacy getting even stronger. Then after the Second Vatican Council and the liberal progressive modernists really take control of seminaries and Catholic universities and all chancery offices, then you see really, like under John Paul and Benedict, you see a very strong Catholic emphasis among conservatives like Caelan Mee on the papacy, on Rome. We need that strong Roman sense. So when Pope Francis comes along and he calls this this synod on synodality to, in a sense, make the church less centripetal and more centrifugal, the worry begins to creep in that maybe this synod really isn't about, in a sense, changing the authority lines of the church so much as it is a stalking horse for something else. That's right. We're suspicious that it's a stalking horse for something else, and we're suspicious that that stalking horse is the sexual revolution, gay marriage, all that kind of stuff, that that's what they were really after. And many of the synod participants, before they even got there, were very open about the fact. That's what we want the synod to do. We want gay marriage. We want women priests. We want abortion and contraception. We want all that stuff. And they didn't get it. So now it seems like those of us who saw the synod as a stalking horse were right, because they didn't get what they wanted. So now the Vatican just says, well, we're gonna do it anyway. We're gonna, but we're gonna do it in this way that makes it seem like we're not really doing it. They knew darn well how this thing was gonna land. They knew exactly how the New York Times was gonna spin it. And they did it anyway. And then they say, and we're not gonna talk about it anymore because they want it to fall out this way. So, it's just, you know, so during my own synod in the Christian Forum Church, I had all kinds of people, I was kind of giving little reports on it. And people, you know, Roman Catholic, people are like, I'm fascinated by what's going on in your synod. And I'm thinking, why? Why? Now I'm watching this and I'm just fascinated by what's going on with, because, you know, there's points of contact, obviously, and obviously also in a Protestant denomination like the Christian Forum Church, where the synod is sort of the top thing. And so when the synod makes a decision, the, those who are in the, I would call it, I would always call it the, the, the, the, the, the cy board, which was the synodical board. They, I mean, there's a funny, but there's a funny thing happening, at least in the Christian Forum Church is a funny thing happening because a lot of the, the young conservatives have no aspirations for taking over the institution. Now, I don't know how this plays out. I mean, Father, Father Eric, again, I won't, Father Eric, if you're coming in here with comments, you know, he's, you're on you for this. I'm not putting you in a corner. I say amen to that, Father Eric, yes. But one of the things that I've heard from Roman Catholics is that, oh, this is just the way the Catholic Church goes. You have a liberal pope and you have a conservative pope. You just keep going, tick, tock, tick, tock, tick, tock, between them, although there, of course, there was John Paul and then there was Benedict and then there was Francis. I mean, how, is it, is it just sort of Catholic culture to kind of endure these wins and stick with it? Cause you know, I think, you know, it's funny cause Cale and I met via Cale's friend who, Steve, who, you know, has a sub stack and Steve over the, you know, he got to a point of walking away saying, I'm done with it. And of course, in, as a minister, one of the things that we've been dealing with in the West and in America has been people walking away from the church, Protestant churches, Catholic churches, Orthodox churches too, my Orthodox friends, plenty of people walking away from those churches as well. And this kind of, it's funny because you, you'll get losses on both sides. You'll get those who say, you know, the Catholic Church is irredeemable. There's, you know, they won't do the obvious thing, which is to understand that gay couples are couples too and should be afforded, you know, the language of marriage. And then you've got people on the other side that say, look, that the one thing that they're supposed to do is guard the treasure of the church and hear, you know, there and in a very incoherent way. So of course, it's so funny when you talked about sort of, you know, Methodist envy. I, when I heard that, I immediately thought, I look at what's happening with the United Methodists. And the last thing I have is envy because it just looks horrible. It's a mess. Yeah. Well, that's what I always want to ask. My left of center, you know, progressive Catholic friends is like, you know, let's just play a quick, you know, mind experiment, you know, like play it out. Let's say that Pope Francis pushes through all these reforms, both named and unnamed. And he gets his way. Like everything's perfectly synodal. We've got blessings of same-sex marriages. We have blessings of communion and, divorce and remarriage, et cetera, et cetera. And we have a female priesthood and all those sorts of things. I mean, what do they actually think is going to happen? Like, do they, what's so fascinating to me, Paul is someone who does as much as I can to get out of my bubble and to interact with all my other, you know, Christian friends, et cetera, et cetera. Like, do they really think that it is going to work? Like, well, this really like build out the church. And I baffled that they would even, you know, what are they even thinking? We have a control in this experiment and it comes from our Protestant brothers and sisters. It's called liberal Protestantism. They already did that and it didn't work. I mean, look at the Germans. The Germans are engaged in their own, if you don't know, they're engaged in their own synodal process, the German thing. And they want, you know, they don't want just gay blessings. They want gay marriage. They want, you know, everything. All the progressive wish list. And so to go to Cale's question, do they think it's going to work? I mean, just look around Germany. As low as mass attendance is among Catholics in Germany, around 10% or something like that, the Lutherans are even worse. All right, and the Lutherans have already gone down the pathway of progressive accommodation to modern secular values and gay this and all the feminist that. They've already done that. It hasn't helped them one with. In fact, it seems to have made them worse. And yet the German bishops keep saying, we have to change in order to stay relevant. With secular German culture. And you wonder, my goodness, how blind, how blind must you be to think that this is the path that we need to go down? Now, I will say too, with regard to Father Eric's comment about the next pope needs to be a canonist. I say, yeah. You know, in the sense that- Tell everybody what that means though, Paul, Larry. Tell everybody what it means. Well, meaning canon law is the law that governs the internal life of the Catholic Church. It governs all the various. In other words, Catholics believe that they have rights and that priests have rights and bishops have rights and duties and so forth. And this is all regulated by this thing we call canon law. It goes way back to the medieval world. And it's actually a wonderful thing in many, many ways because it does in a sense mean that the church has a certain forensic structure to it. So you just can't do whatever you want. Now, the fact is Pope Francis seems to act like an autocrat and like he can just do whatever he wants and make things up as he goes along. And this is precisely what has thrown the church into its current crisis. I disagree that Catholics just have to get used to a conservative pope than a liberal pope. The fact is Pope Francis is, I mean, he's without parallel. I mean, yeah, Paul VI was maybe a little more liberal than John Paul that came after. But we've never had a pope that said, you know what? It might be just okay if the church turned a blind eye to gay sex, you know? Or if we just decided that all those rules governing marriage and sexuality are just, ah, push off, we're not gonna, yeah, we're gonna do that. Stop being rigid. Stop being rigid. We've never had a pope like that. And that's precisely the kind of crisis that we've been tossed into. The pope who just seems to rule by fiat and not according to the tradition and the scriptures and canon law. So my ideal next pope would be an Italian who's essentially more the bishop of Rome than the pope of the universal church who never writes a thing, never travels to another country, right? Never issues any dictats or admonitions. He simply governs the church in its day-to-day, nuts and bolts operations as governed by canon law. A man who knows therefore, one of the things that's not spoken enough of with regard to Pope Francis is the manner in which he's flaunted canon law with regard to the, in a sense, the prosecution of bishops accused of covering up sexual abuse in the church. That's right, that's right, that's right. That Pope Francis seems to have played favorites in that regard. And he's lifted the statute of limitations put down by canon law on some cases and then not lifted it in others as in the case of Father Rupnik, the Jesuit who is now famous in the news for being a sexual abuser. And the Pope refused to lift that until just recently when there was an outcry. And so suddenly he lifted that. Oh, I've just gotten word of this disturbing information and I'm lifting the statute of limitations. So there seems to be this arbitrariness. And so I agree with Father Eric. We need a Pope that's gonna return the rule of law to the church and a respect for her traditions. What you said about Bishop of Rome is so interesting to me because again, part of, so the third player in this drama lately has been orthodoxy at least in this little corner. A lot of people have gone to orthodoxy. I mean, Rod Dreher in many ways, someone who many of us know. And so then this question of, okay, who is the Pope? How does he function? And then how, and then the tension, obviously as a Protestant, this synodical thing is very interesting to me in terms of how, that's why I found those Vatican I, Vatican II books so very interesting because you have this real conversation on how the body of Christ lives through time and continues to live. And one of the amazing things obviously of the Roman Catholic Church is that it is so global, it is so massive, it is so diverse. I mean, people, diversity is this, the Roman Catholics have diversity and strength, but obviously diversity always has to be in relationship with commonality, otherwise the diversity makes no sense either. So, well, this is just fascinating for me. So where, I gotta keep an eye on the time here too, where does the church go from here? I mean, politically this has to be just sort of a, just sort of a bomb that goes off among many Catholics who are, again, I sort of ask, do you just sort of wait this out, hoping for the next Pope? Because obviously the Pope also has power in terms of the Pope is brought in by the Cardinals and who appoints the Cardinals, but- The Pope, yeah, it's a bit incestuous, isn't it? But I would say this- Inescapably so though, I mean- Oh yeah, I don't think we want simply a restorationist Pope who's gonna come in and say, a pox upon all of that nonsense that just came before me, we're gonna roll the clock back and simply really put the hammer down and go back to good old, old-timey Catholics. That's a romanticism and a conceit that we can do without. It can't be a draconian restorationist Pope, but a Pope Francis part two would be a catastrophe of the highest order as well. But I do think the next Pope, the thing would be, well, then we need a centrist Pope. No, we just need a Pope, I think, who's going to continue on. I think the legacy of synodality is important. I believe that the church needs to be more synodal and less focused on Rome, I do. I just don't think that this Pope is really up to that, and I don't think that's what they've been doing. A more synodal, so yeah, I hope the next Pope continues with a reformist agenda of making the Catholic Church less centralized on Rome, more synodally structured, like we see more in the Eastern churches, and that it goes back to emphasizing doctrine as a pathway to sanctification, that the goal of the Christian life is to become holy, to be sanctified. In other words, a liturgical spirituality that is exuding out of the church, calling people to high, because it seems to me that right now what we have is a church that's lowering the bar, dumbing things down, saying, well, let's not get too upset about any of this kind of stuff. I think in order to differentiate ourselves from the world, the only evangelization that's going to work is when the church becomes provocative again, when the church becomes a Christological provocation again, when the church becomes a church that has something interesting, freaking different from the world to offer to the world as its best light. We need a pope, therefore, who's prophetic, a bit contrarian, but nevertheless, still is confirmed in his belief that there is need for these reforms in the church. Well, it's so funny because, of course, when you use the word prophetic in headquarters, they would be arguing that the pope is being prophetic when the pope is making this move. No, because it's just going along with the world. That's not prophetic. Well, I know, but part of the strangeness of this moment is the perpetual, Jonathan Pujol often talks about, I'd say that the current regime of the world keeps sort of propping up the traditionalists because you need to keep putting up the man so that the person can continue to speak truth to power when, in fact, the person with the power is the one speaking. So it's just, there's so many of these fascinating turns here, I wanna highlight a couple of, so if anybody in there has questions, put questions in all caps or do a super chat so I can easily see it. Anthony wrote, I think a good, oh, let me find it here. Anthony says, Catholics all over the world continue to fast and feast together, carry on. It's, you know, that's sort of this other element of kind of a populism that says, down at the grassroots, we will continue to do what we do. The stuff going up at the top is always, over time, this stuff gets sifted out and the maintenance of the local is what's primary. This is really, really, really important on another level as well, and I love that comment in the episode, 99% of the world don't even, if you were to ask most Catholics in the world, even Americans, what do you think of the synod and synodality? They go, what in the hell are you talking about? What do you think about Fiducia Suplicans, the new document from the deal, and what the heck are you talking about? They wouldn't know, and so this is a good caveat, but even something else here, which is this, the vast majority of growth in the Catholic Church is now taking place in the global south, okay? And so, and when I was covering the synod in Rome, I was talking with a Dominican priest from Africa, a Nigeria, who said to me, the problem with so many of these discussions at the synod from liberal North American and Europeans is that they reflect the petty, bourgeois, sexual concerns of the global north. They do not reflect the concerns of Catholics in the global south. And so that comment that just came up about, we feast and fast together, it's not specifically aiming at that particular thing, but there is a great truth in that, that Catholics around the world globally are not really all that concerned with the issues that we are, it seems. Well, and so Phlebas, who's another member of the Christian Reformed Church, says the CRC Senate ignored conservative minorities. Do Catholics also ignore conservative non-Western members? And I think that's basically what you just said. Yeah, and I would just say that they did apparently try to ignore the global south, but the global south just really fought back pretty hard yesterday, I think Larry would agree with me. Yeah, the global south punched back. Yeah, that was a huge punch back. I do not think that the pope and his courtiers expected that. Well, given that this pope comes from the global south. Well, right, but yeah, right, sure. So, but as you know, Paul, as someone who operated in Latin America, the class distinctions of Latin America do not hold in Africa. Right. Right. They do not hold in the same way. And so, the fact that Pope Francis comes from the global south, he's a European though. So, he's a European, yeah, so I'm just gonna leave it there. Now, I was first gonna pass over Father Eric's question, but I do want to maybe contextualize it Father Eric, I hope I'm not doing injustice to your question, but part of, at least as a, I think to a degree, Protestants assume a level of impurity even within their own attempting reforming, purifying traditions that when I sort of look at the Catholic church, this is, I mean, as Protestants that go, who left hundreds of years ago, who still said, well, we're still kind of Catholic and we're protesting against stuff in the Catholic church. How does this play? I mean, again, as a Protestant, this continues to just fascinate me how, so what do good Catholics think about problems in, right, the center of their own hierarchy? It just baffles me. Mm. Yeah, it's a great question. Kale, you wanna start? Yeah, that is a great question. Look, this is the reason why I care about this stuff, right? Because I don't know what podcast, maybe it was last week, Paul, I don't remember, I talked so much, but the thing that animates me more than anything is that I received the faith of my parents and I have grown that and tried to do my best to be, you know, attend to that faith and I'm obsessed with trying to pass that faith onto my children because I believe it's that important. And so, but I would also say that I care about the generational transfer beyond, you know, House Zeldin. And as a teacher, I am deeply concerned that we collectively are not doing a good job of passing on a supernatural faith to our children and therefore, you know, the world that my kids will help build out is, I think, greatly threatened by the flippancy and seeming casualness of the generation who currently sort of hold the reins of responsibility. And I'm struck, it's a little bit of a digression, but this image has been popping in my head the whole time and I feel like I just need to get it out there. But if you look at sort of old pictures of popes, right, and, you know, it strikes our modern sensibilities as like completely ridiculous, right, completely overdone and overmuch, right, and you've got this- On the big throne and everything. But, right, so, you know, so all of our casual sensibilities and look, maybe Paul, this is why I waged my denouement, I don't know, but part of our, we live in a very, the ethos of the casual, right, that, you know, we wanna kinda keep it real and all that sort of stuff. And I get it, all right, I'm American after all. But if you look at those images, right, the pope with these extremely, these heavy mantles and this huge, heavy crown that he's wearing and these red shoes and like all of the stuff, right, and you can like barely kind of see like a little human being that's sort of holding all of this, like, on him, the weight is enormous. But that weight is serious, right, that weight is not just symbolic. The weight is real, right, so that the holder of this office, I mean, remember, Catholics hold, you know, the person sitting on Peter's chair holds the keys to the kingdom, okay, this is like Catholic 101 stuff, right, so can you imagine the awesome burden and responsibility of knowing that this is what you are responsible for? Like, I'm responsible for like my wife and my kids and my students and, you know, and local, nice little local things, right, and fine, right. This guy is responsible for like the whole thing, right, and to see the kind of flippancy on display, at least from my vantage point, means like, man, I really wish we had a pope who would like wear all the heavy stuff and wear the red shoes and wear the heavy crowns because at least I know that that's a guy who can feel the weight of his office. And I just don't get that sense, you know, I don't get the sense that this guy, you know, look, the definitive statement of Pope Francis will forever be, and I really believe that this will be, is like, who am I to judge? Yeah, that's the first thing that comes to mind, is interesting answer. Exactly, exactly. And of course, you know, I wasn't in the plane naturally, but if I can kind of put myself back in the plane, the answer is very simple, you, you are to judge. You have been tasked with holding down this awesome responsibility in which you have accepted the keys to the kingdom. And the keys to the kingdom mean that you can bind in heaven and bind on honor and loosen heaven and loose honor. You, you were the one, you were the stopper, like you were the, and so to me, my anger and my frustration about this current pontificate is that it doesn't seem to me like he can see beyond his own nose and he doesn't wanna be the jerk and he doesn't, you know, I don't know, I just don't get it. And that's, so why, I don't know why this Pope got to be Pope, but you know, so I do not answer Father Eric's question. Several things here. First, in a sense of the question from Father Eric, why does God allow evil? I'm assuming he means within the church as you framed the question, Paul. And of course Catholics have known for a very long time, at least once have, even a modicum of understanding of church history that Popes have been scoundrels in the past, moral scoundrels. You know, they've had mistresses and children and, you know, it was very nefarious goings on financially, maybe even had a few people murdered along the way. Who the heck knows? I think there's a list of Popes and there's like 30 of them or so out of 200 some, you know, we're pretty lousy characters. The existential crisis though for many Catholics today, the evil that they see is that, okay, we've known that Popes are sinners, but one of the things that makes us Catholic and not Protestant is precisely, we view the church as this rock of truth in an ocean of uncertainty. And we point to Protestant fractiousness and say, see there, that's what happens when you don't have this rock of truth. Even the scriptures are open to all kinds of different interpretations. You need an authoritative interpreter who's infallible under certain conditions. And this rock is what holds the church together. I know many Protestants who became Catholic because of the chaos in the Protestant churches. And when John Paul was Pope, yes, he's this beacon of truth to which we can all. So now along comes Pope Francis and he seems to throw the truth part of that into question. He seems to be overturning certain long-held doctrines of the church, which implies this. The church can make huge mistakes in matters of faith and morals. We've always been taught as Catholics that the church when teaching definitively cannot err on a matter of great importance in faith and morals. And yet here we seem to have a papacy that is doing just that. And that's then like you look at various people that we all know who have left the faith, all right, because they couldn't negotiate the rocky shore of a papacy that seems to be teaching error because it throws the ideology in question right into the toilet. And so one theory that a very conservative Catholic canonist, a canonist, canon lawyer, Edward Penton, he floated this theory that, because he asked the question, why did God allow Pope Francis to become Pope of the, Jorge Barco Leo to become Pope of the church? His theory is that in order to in effect, create a purgation to like Lansing a boil, that this descent from truth, the truth of Christ, modernism, whatever you wanna call it, had been going on just beneath the surface of the Catholic church for a century. John Paul and Benedict kind of held it in check, okay? But it was still there. And those of us involved in the theological guild knew it was there, was still there. So Ed Penton's theory is that allowing a Pope that's, we're not even gonna say, the Pope's not a heretic, whatever, but he's allowing, he's re-empowering these people. So Penton's view is that God is simply allowing the cockroaches to come out of the woodwork, all right, so that we can identify them and purge them out of the church eventually. Not through a pogrom, not through inquisitions, but in a sense for the bankruptcy of their project to finally be exposed. And for Catholicism to come out of this crisis, it's having itself been chastened, that no longer can we be this old fashioned triumphalist church with an infallible Pope on all things, that sort of oracle in the Tiber, but nor can we simply be like a chameleon with the world. We have to be something uniquely different. And I think Ed Penton says, what that different thing is, as yet to be seen. Wow, wow. That's quite something. I'm gonna keep chewing on, but both of you really powerful speeches, I gotta keep chewing on both of your speeches. This has been super helpful for me. Mark, who is from Ireland, what did Cale mean by Methodist envy? Because Mark is actually a Methodist, so he's nearly caught his ears. I should have put a little asterisk next to that little tag. I mean, I'm being somewhat flippant and facetious. And what I mean by this is that those people who I jokingly said had Methodist envy, in other words, they can dream of a church which they can frankly not have to have a Pope, right? And so therefore you can kind of not, you have more wiggle room with which to make things happen that you wanna have happen. So I was being a little bit flip. So no offense to my Methodist brothers and sisters. But what I mean by that is really to get out of having to deal with a hierarchy. I like Methodist, by the way. I love Wesleyan theology of sanctification, which is far closer, I think, to the Catholic view than many other Protestant iterations. But anyway, that's just me. Having listened to a lot of these. I don't quite understand this question. Having listened to a lot of debates between Catholics and Protestants, is it correct that there's a notable divergence between apologists and academics? Sure, yeah, of course, right there. Oh yeah. Yeah, because academics, you know this world better than me, Larry. No, well, yeah, you find a lot of online especially. Maybe that's what they're thinking about. There's all these professional Catholic apologists out there who have now made a living off of running around giving talks in parishes, engaging in internet debates. Look, but some of it's good. I'm just not a blanket combination of that sort of thing. I think- You know, that's good, yeah, I shouldn't be so- I think the rise of the apologists is downstream from the fact that the flock is hungry and has not been fed, right? So you can complain about Catholic online commentators and grippers and all that kind of stuff, but really that's because the shepherds have not been feeding the flock. That's right. And the academics have not been paying attention to the flock either. I mean, in this regard, I do agree with Pope Francis who said, we have to get theology from behind its desk and out more into the world. Now desk theology has to be done upfront. We all have to sit and study. But too much theology, Catholic, is so abstract and metaphysical and ethereal that it never trickles. I think just to my own, one of the reasons why my blog kind of took off is because I'm a former academic theologian who then tried to use my teaching undergraduate background to translate this stuff into what people can understand. If I'm dismissive of the apologists, it's only because I think oftentimes, some of them are quite good, Cale's right, but oftentimes they fall into certain, I think, superficial stereotypes about what Protestants are, what Catholics are, what the Orthodox are. And I don't know, it's a little simplistic, I think, at times. McMo asks, aren't the trads and the libs both pointing at the hierarchy saying, see, what does it mean to love your enemy when they become your neighbor? Yeah. What's fun, again, part of what's fun about this corner is part of the goal here is you do actually get to know people. And so you have an idea where they're coming from with questions like this because no questions are without context. Obviously, this is something that we dealt with. This is something that emerged clearly in the debate in the Christian Reformed Church. Both sides were saying, we need pastoral care with respect to our LGBTQ friends and neighbors, but it was so clear to me that, well, because of obviously their position and their perspective on these, the pastoral care is going to have, they're looking for very different outcomes. And I think that points to the, what is the eschatology of both of these positions? What is the outcome? And so that's where the propositional layer doesn't go away because your take on sort of a fundamental idea about this form of relationship is in fact going to shape how you imagine you can best love them. Oh, absolutely. I mean, let's take the, I mean, the issue of homosexuality is a case in point. And the whole brouhaha over same sex blessings really has a more antecedent and more fundamental question. What is the best pastoral approach to our homosexual friends, neighbors, brothers, sisters, and so on? Progressive say that the best pastoral approach is to simply bless what they're doing in a sense that say that's their experience, that's their orientation. It's God given, they didn't choose it. And so our task is simply affirm them in that. And that's that. The traditionalists come along and say, it's a sin. It's a mortal sin. And they're going to hell if they continue in it and die. And so our job is to tell them that they're going to hell if they don't repent because they're on the path to perdition. My approach would be, okay, maybe you both have a point, but the only thing to me that seems to be pastorally speaking that's going to appeal, since I do have a conservative sexual ethic, appeal to say a sexually active gay man to come out of that lifestyle would be to emphasize that the gospel is liberating and that the moral teachings of the church are there in order to elevate and lift us up into a higher order that Kale was talking about, supernatural order, that actually makes you joyous and happy and healthy and all those things. And so the reason why I'm telling you that I think this is the better path is because I think it's better for you. And so I think those are the sort of kind of lines of pastoral practice that we see. But and to the question, yeah, I mean, my answer to that is that both the progressives and the trans are pointing at the hierarchy and saying, see, which is exactly how the document was received, right? You had on both sides of the court of the divide, people like, yeah, see, see, so it was a fascinating Worshack test. Yeah, I think something too with all these debates to keep in mind is that people are not evil, most people, right, that we're talking about our fellow baptized Christians, whether they're trans or modernists or conservatives and neocons or communio thinkers like me, that we're having conversations with people that we really should care about and that they are our fellow parishioners in Christ. And that's so many of these debates, you know, I get very pugilistic, I get very animated, and people mistake that for thinking, oh, you must really hate the liberals in your, not at all. In fact, I'd rather hang out with liberals than pinched up conservative types myself, to be honest. I'd rather sit down and have a beer and a cigar with the most flaming liberal you could find than the most rad, traddy kind of everybody's going to hell. I've been sucking on dreams. Oh, you always hate the rad, trads, Tyra. You always hate an allure of the rad, trads. I always have to get my digs in because I've been assailed by them so often. That's a good question. Larry, I want to hear you this. I want to hear you this. Well, I'd like to know what the definition of schism would be because, you know, it all, there's just sort of a, in the Christian Forum Church, I mean, we're probably looking at one basically because the whole, the preeminent part of the church at the center, the elites in the Christian Forum Church are probably going to get pushed out. And so with the Christian Forum Church, it's a big deal. But, you know, the Protestant Reformation obviously was a massive thing, but what's, and I always say that church. Like you said, schism is important to define here. In Catholic theology, Protestants are not in schism with the Catholic Church. Protestants are apostates and heretics. Well, not apostates, no, heretics. They are heretics. Their churches are heretical. Apostates are different things. But like the Eastern Orthodox, we would say are schismatics. They're schismatics, okay? Meaning they have all the valid elements of holy orders and sacraments and apostolic succession like we do, only they don't subscribe to the authority of the Pope. So let's take that definition of schism that I think it could very well be if we get a Pope Francis part two after this Pope dies and we get someone who's just like him or maybe even more liberal, then I think you're gonna see, you'll probably see Catholic areas of the world, maybe like Africa and so forth, maybe getting together to elect their own Pope. I don't know. I don't know what form the schism would take or to simply say maybe a softer schism, simply saying we just don't recognize the authority of the current dude. What do you think, Dan? Yeah, I would say that, man, my gut reaction is that everything in Catholicism moves super slow the last couple of months, notwithstanding. I think that this stuff is gonna be protracted and drawn out, but what's also happening, and you know, Blair and I have talked about this before, but there is going to be an absolute cliff dive in about 15 years, just demographically, right? So Boomer Church is on the way out. I just mean literally. I mean, they're going to die out. And so the whole dynamic of the Catholic Church is going to radically change. And I think, Paul, like, this is one of the reasons why I love talking with you and listening to you, is that in a weird sort of way, the conservatives in your own denomination, they're gonna win the war of attrition because they have children. And I think that a similar thing is going to happen in Roman Catholicism is that the Germans have money because of their weird tax structures, right? But they don't have children. And I mean that both literally and metaphorically. So that in the United States of America, if you look at the sort of the Boomer millennial trend, Boomers were raised Catholic, and they make all those movies about what it was like to live in that Catholic world, and their kids didn't grow up Catholic. And so if they even have kids, just by the numbers, which is not many of them, the millennials won't have baptisms. They won't have any of these kinds of things. So, you know, so what would a schism mean today? Like if the issue were forced, like right now, it could be an interesting question. But I think in less than 20 years, it's gonna be a big shrug. I think that all of the, I really do believe that what happened two days ago with the releasing of this document sealed the deal that we will not have a Francis II. And yeah, I'm rarely this optimistic. It sealed the deal. We're not gonna have a Francis II. You know, I don't know if we're gonna have like a hyper reactionary one. I doubt it. I just think, you know, the way that Catholic hierarchy works, they tend to be sort of small C conservative, not ideologically conservative, but just in terms of their mood and their modus operandi. So I don't know. I think we're gonna have a kind of swinging back of the pendulum on some level. And then that person is gonna have to deal with the fact that there are no more kids. So this is peak. This is, and you often see that this is kind of, this is gonna be their high water mark. This is as high as it gets. And I do think that I did that five years ago. I thought five years ago I was really in a dark. I'm just gonna throw one monkey wrench into that. I love your analysis. You know what, Kale? I hope you are right. I really, really, and like I said, I don't know if my scenario of, you know, people in a sense of electing their own, probably not, probably not. There might be a sort of de facto soft system of people just saying, we're not gonna pay attention to this guy. But anyway, the reason why I'm a little, I love your analysis because when I first started off as a young theologian, say in the early 1990s, and I was going to Catholic theological conferences and ecumenical theological conferences, had Protestants too. And I would just be overwhelmed by how many theologians, 90% of them were all like liberal progressive, you know, feminist deconstructionist types and going, my God, does anybody believe in the Evangel, the Gospel anymore? What the heck? So it was despairing. And I would have older wise theologians who were like my age now say to me, don't worry, Larry, don't worry. Your day will come. Liberal Christianity doesn't self perpetuate. Demographically, this is all gonna die out. By the time you're my age, your generation will be in charge of things. And this, you know what? And that day never came. And every single time I kept expecting for there to be a sea change in the theological guild and the leadership cowardice of the Catholic Church. And that's what cowardice, all right? I was just devastated at every turn. And then the pre-sex scandal hit the fan in 2001. And you saw the depth, the depth of the cowardice of the Catholic hierarchy and their complicity in moral evil of a highest order. And you begin to really despair. So I'm sorry, I hope you're right, but I'm really cynical because these old coots have a way of clinging to power like grim death because they know it's all they have is power. That's right. It's all they have. Why is it therefore? Well, you got a Pope from the global South who talks all the time about going to the peripheries. But when it came time to run the Senate and synodality, he put an old liberal guy from Luxembourg in charge of it. Who's own church, Cardinal Holorich, whose own church in Luxembourg is in a free falling dive into nothingness, into total nihilistic oblivion because of its liberal policies. And yet the Pope chose him, a guy who publicly said, oh, I think the church is full of it on homosexuality. We need to change all of that stuff. That's the guy the Pope put in charge. And that's what I'm talking about. These guys clinging, clinging to power because it's the only thing they have. And so I'm not disagreeing with you. I'm just saying, I don't know how long it's gonna take. All right. Well, I guess what I mean, I guess what I was saying, my optimism is not that it's going to be some sort of new springtime to use the popular lingo. I don't believe that. I believe that the devastation is gonna be so massive and widespread that they're just gonna be few of us losers hanging around who actually still believe this stuff. Right? And so it's not, I'm not offering you a triumphal vision. I'm offering a vision of survival. You know, post-apocalyptic. And I agree with you. Therefore, I don't think we're gonna have schism. What I think is what we're going to have is a kind of a parallel church is going on. A kind of underground church of people who view themselves as kind of authentic. I don't wanna use the word remnant that has so many negative connotations. Yeah, it's a crude. You're crude and self-righteous. But just there'll be people like you and I, more traditional minded Catholics who are just gonna try and fly under the radar and preserve some semblance of traditional Catholicism. Even if the edifice is kind of crumbling all around us. Yeah. All right. Well, before I open the Seagate here and let the chaos monsters in, Larry, you're welcome to stay. I often do a little bit of an after show here where I bring people in. Sure, I'll stay. Yeah. All right. Let's go ahead. Go ahead, Joe. I may have to bow out because I have a date with my children. So go ahead. Okay, so I'm gonna bring in Julian, who is an old school corner guy here. One of the first conversations I ever had. And he lets himself in. So whatever damage you do to your career, father, it's on you. All right. All right. Too good, too good. Julian, let's have you have the first word. Julian is in the Hutterite community in Southern Alberta and one of the sharpest guys. He was a young guy when he first showed up here. And now he's a seasoned dude. So Julian, your thoughts. Ah, I don't know. Yeah, it's actually Southwestern Manitoba, not Alberta. Oh, okay. I'm sorry. I didn't want to misstate you or misprovince you. It's a bit of a different Hutterite world in Alberta than in Manitoba. Yeah, I don't know. I've been following this way too closely. So I have all sorts of thoughts. I mean, I think I can understand some of the reactions of this being kind of really confusing. And I'm not sure how sustainable the distinction is between liturgical and non-liturgical blessings, but I'm hearing an echo. From my understanding of Francis's pontificate and what he's trying to do, I can just see this as a really pastoral move as a way of kind of saying, you can't kind of lead with condemnation and especially in a Western context, who is, I mean, how can you kind of encounter people who don't, you can't imagine. I mean, I meet people who it's unimaginable for them to think of homosexuality as anything other than just a normal way a person expresses themselves. And so I think in conservative bubbles, it's like, well, the moral teaching is clear, but I think Francis's instinct is right that if you want to encounter these people, it has to be through the unconditional love of God. And that's how I kind of see him sort of trying to position himself and kind of wants to emphasize that that's how priests should be kind of moving through these issues. So I don't know, that's kind of how I see. Yeah, well, I think you see that with the desire to make this a kind of a pastoral versus theological, you know, distinctions that are trying to be drawn. I ultimately don't think that those distinctions are real. Yeah, and I would say that there is, there are various levels of gradation between, okay, see you, Cale, between condemnation. I know very few people in the academic guild in which I move or the Catholic circles in which I move who are simply going to say, well, we're gonna condemn the homosexuals. We want nothing to do with them. I've got loads of gay family members and friends, and we've had them in our church and so on. It's no big deal. But there is a little echo going on. It's throwing me off. Yeah, I'm trying to figure out who's got the echo. But anyway. Is it you, Nate? Surely it's not I, Lord. But you know what? My response to that idea that the pope is just being pastoral here is this. Show me the church in the West of judgmental, pharisaical, finger-wagging moralizers. The problem in most Western Catholic churches is exactly the opposite, that we have a church filled with bourgeois, petty bourgeois moderns who are moral relativists of a certain kind, not necessarily of an ideological kind, but of a certain kind, especially in matters sexual. In a sense, the last thing in the world that the church needs to be doing right now on a pastoral level is simply green lighting all of that and saying, well, we now approve of it, and we're calling that pastoral. So that's the problem that I have. I don't wanna be condemnatory, but I also don't wanna send a green light that says, we now approve of all of this. There's no problem with any of this. And I really don't care what the world thinks in one sense. Obviously, I do care, because I live in it, and as a teacher, I have to take it into consideration. But there are many aspects of Christianity that the world finds grossly incoherent and unpalatable, and I don't think we should change those teachings simply because a group of people in Western culture, and once again, we're talking about the global North, vast swaths of the global South would not share your point of view that homosexuality is just, well, just a given that it's okay. Now, the global South has an opposite problem of homophobia and draconian laws against it and so forth that has to be addressed, I think. But anyway, I sympathize. I think that is what Pope Francis is trying to do. I do. I think that's what he's trying to do. I don't think he deliberately woke up one morning and said, I think I'm going to undermine the entire edifice of Catholic moral theology in one fell swoop. Excellent. No, I don't think that's what he's doing. I just think that it's a shallow and facile distinction to make between draconian self-righteous condemnation on the one hand and just sort of an insouciant, let's live and let live mentality on the other. That's fair. I mean, I wasn't trying to say that's my position, that the traditional position is. No, your point was a really good one. I'm just saying I kind of exist in two worlds. Like I exist in a very conservative, how to write community, that kind of really conservative position is sort of accepted as a matter of course in most circles. Then I go to this university and there I encounter people who like they couldn't even imagine how anyone could have an objection to this kind of thing. And so I sort of find myself kind of in a world in between where I would like to have a more nuanced conversation about this stuff. And I just don't, I just really often can't have it with either group. And so. But I tell you what, Julian, I think that is a desperately needed conversation to have. And unfortunately, a lot of these other debates that we are having about this Vatican document or this kind of blessing are, as I think I said earlier in our conversation, they're kind of masking over a more antecedent issue, which is what is our view of homosexuality? What's it all about? And I think Larry, that's part of, I mean, I really appreciated your pushback on the ideal because you're right that ideals are never finally reached. And that is a weakness of ideal. And you're exactly right that there are many ways that, when the rich young ruler says to Jesus, obey the law, all these things, I'm not committing adultery. I'm not stealing from my neighbor. I'm not, of course, you've got Jesus then treating it in the Sermon on the Mount as well. But attempting to bridge that gap is, you're both left on one hand, you have to have sort of an antithetical divide that there, and I think that's part of what has given the Roman church its power in the current context where it feels like all of the major institutions have gotten so chaotic that at least with the Orthodox or the Rome or the deeply conservatives, there are bright lines and there is clarity. And at least with those bright lines and clarity, you can at least do some orienting, you can do some orientation. That's true. I think my point would be, I would like your father's opinion on this too. And others have pointed this out. One of the problems that I have with Pope Francis is that he takes that insight, the pastoral insight, Julian was talking about this sort of notion that none of us reach the ideal that you're talking about. And he's trying to turn that into a kind of pastoral principle that the church is going to impose from the top down. This is now the church's official policy. We're going to be lenient on X, Y, Z. One important fact, I think a better pastoral approach is to simply hang on to the time-honored gospel truths of morality, whatever it is. And then to simply allow to take place what has always already been taking place, which is pastors on the ground making those kinds of concrete adjudications about, okay, I know this guy over here. He's been married to this woman for 30 years. They have 87 kids. He was married to this other woman for three days 30 years ago. They can't get an annulment. What the hell am I supposed to do? Then the priest comes forward and says, hey, Jerry, go ahead and come up for communion. I think it's okay. This has been going on from time immemorial, but now it's being sort of turned into a principle. And that's then unsettling people and making it so, well, what's going on? Can anybody go to communion? Anyway, go ahead. Yeah, there's an old adage in Roman law that hard cases make for bad law. And as a canon lawyer in training, I'd like to have to hold that up. There's also something that I cannot wrap my head around, but seems to be very consistent is the difference between the approach to negative moral norms in kind of Anglophone Catholicism and Spanish speaking Catholicism, right? Yep. Yeah. So what's a negative moral norm? That's a thou shalt not. And like the way I was trained in seminary and the way I've always thought is, thou shalt not is always possible. You always have the option to not commit adultery. You always have the option to not steal because that's a matter of not doing something. Those are good options. Those are good options. That's right. And it appears right now, all of us are doing that. So you can always have the default meaning, and then going to on the other side of these. And it seems like Anglo speaking Catholics are like really plod onto that, really hold onto that tight, especially those of us who were inspired by Veritatis Splendor when St. John Paul II reiterated the perennial teaching on this matter that you always have the option to not do the not. And somehow it just seems different in Spanish speaking Catholicism and I don't understand it at all. Like they're not as worried about it or they handle it differently or they don't think about it that way. I just remember I lived in the Dominican Republic for a year learning Spanish. And I remember I was sitting outside of a church in Santiago and all the doors are open, these big arches, there's no screen, no doors. And as I was a seminary, I was gonna go to mass and all the women and children were inside the church going to mass. All the men were outside on the steps of the church smoking cigarettes and playing dominoes and drinking beer. And I struck up a conversation with these guys and I said, don't you guys go to mass? And they said, well, we are going, we are. This is us at mass. Plus there was a corporate sense of family. My wife and my kids are in at mass kind of as proxies for me and I'm out here having a cigarette and playing dominoes and I'm close enough to the action that this counts. So I, but as an Anglophone thinker, I'm thinking, isn't that a mortal sin that you're missing mass on a Sunday and it's a, that was the American coming. So you're right, you're absolutely right. Well, before I bring Nate in, I wanna, I just wanna respond a little bit to Larry. I mean, part of what happened in the Christian Reformed Church too is that ironically it was the pushing of the issue by the progressives where many moderate CRC clergy who had a fair amount of flexibility at the local level to deal with these issues suddenly because we had to make the, we had to make the permission law. Then suddenly the conservative pushback then said, no, we have to make sure we close the door tight. And so many of us moderates on the ground that of course have been dealing with many of these issues, our entire ministry are like, well, you know, you've really handcuffed me and actually done a disservice to many of the people who are struggling with many of these issues locally, trying to find their way through life. Now I actually have less flexibility on the ground than I had before. And so I remember the progressive winding up to put, go to battle and I thought, I know the numbers in the church, you progressives are gonna get slaughtered. And now suddenly as a moderate, I have less tools. And so it's to bring back Julian's point, the part of what happens in this is the polarization, which actually makes working through process and helping individuals find their way through, you know, a very messy situation, even more difficult for the church. So it does make it more difficult. And he says something interesting, you know, it's obviously with regard to say homosexuality, it's a deeply and profoundly pastoral issue, but there are also ideological and theological components at play here. So that one of the reasons why, you know, all of these more lenient ideas, pastorally speaking, are sought by the progressives to be turned into the very law of the church is because they view it as a matter of justice, that unless we make this into a rule, there is an injustice that is taking place. And therefore there is a theological and an ideological component to this here, all right? And so it's not entirely wrong to simply be saying, no, wait a minute, what is the church thinking theologically about this? But then down on the pastoral level, why that then becomes problematic, where it simply said, allowing gay relationships just to take place is God's will and we're gonna say so, and it's now part of the justice. I have been involved in counseling gay students when I was teaching undergraduates, we had a, I don't mean to cliche, but our biggest major was theater. So we had lots and lots and lots of gay guys on campus, right, and so they were having my theology classes and they'd be in my office and they'd send some dude that maybe would be willing to listen to them. And what was interesting to me is, of course, like 75% of them were like sexually active and so on, and just kind of were struggling with the church's teaching. Fine, got it, and so we chat about that. The 25% of them, maybe even a little bit more, and this wasn't just imbibing the ideology of their oppressor, really didn't want, I'm not gonna say didn't wanna be gay, not conversion therapy or stupid things like that, but simply didn't want to live out that lifestyle. They wanted to live according to the traditional Christian norms, and they were serious about it. These were not super ego guilt induced sort of self-loathing types, just people who really wanted to be called to a higher level of sanctification. In talking with those people now, whenever they would go into a church where it was simply, hey, you can do whatever you want, they felt thrown under the bus. They felt betrayed by the institutional church, for in a sense saying, because they're already getting it from their gay friends, you sap, you fool, you're going with these dumb ass Catholic, oh sorry, these dumb Catholic rules, and so on and so forth. You're just a tool of heteronormative thinking. So they already are getting it from their side, and even family members, and then they turn around in their churches and don't worry about it, don't sweat it, no big deal. In fact, we'll bless it for you, go on. And they feel really betrayed by all of that. And I remember when I was in seminary, I ended up running across a blog of a guy who had been in kind of active gay lifestyle, and all of that, tons of sexual partners, anonymous encounters, all of that. And the overwhelming feeling I got from reading it was that he was deeply lonely, and that lifestyle wasn't satisfied to him. He was chasing after the wind. That's why they came up with gay marriage to try and help with that, I guess, but I don't think that's actually the answer there. And so, I don't know, it seems like the compassionate thing is always to call people towards Christ, and in Catholicism, celibacy isn't a bad thing. Yeah, that's true, and something that can be achieved. All right, Nate, you're in here, and actually you were on a list, I thought of you today, but you can't always get time, so I'm glad you joined us. Yeah, I happened to catch the tail of it right before my lunch break while I was working in, and now I'm on my lunch break, and I just, first of all, I just wanna say that a lot, this, the framing of the discussion on the Catholic side is way healthier, even when it's going badly, than it is on the Protestant side, because pretty much nobody on the Catholic side will talk about the metaphysical absurdity of gay marriage, because it's just like, that's a metaphysically incoherent concept, and so I definitely would be opposed to that. However, however, I am very sympathetic to the idea of a blessing same-sex friendships, because of the long theological tradition of Christian friendship, and kind of having like a don't ask, don't tell kind of position toward, like whether there's a sexual component to that friendship or not. Milbank is, John Milbank has advocated for that kind of position for a long time, and it's not a very popular position, because it doesn't make either the conservatives or the progressives happy. And I think that's probably a sign that it's onto something. And I would also say to Father Eric's point about edge cases making bad law, I think that's precisely why a more pastoral approach, which is what I think the church is trying to stumble its way toward, even if it's making some mistakes in the process, is the way to handle it, precisely because of that. So, and I also think it's like, at some point we have to just deal with the reality that it's like, I don't really know if there's a serious 21st century person who was willing to put homosexual relations on the same moral plane as murder. It's really for, I mean, at most, it's more like having a second piece of cheesecake when you shouldn't have. And that's just the reality. And I think anyone who's, anyone who's like a 21st century North American person who tries to say otherwise, I'm like, I have like a deep distrust of that. And just to be honest, like, first of all, a couple things, A, I'm an Anglican, so I don't have an absolute dog in this fight. So there's that. And then the other thing is, although I was Catholic, but that's a long story. And I still have a lot of theological sensibilities that are Catholic. And the other thing is, is like, I mean, I can't be unbiased on this because like my dad is gay and like I have two gay daughters. So, you know, this is not something that I can just like, it's not just a merely academic issue for me. And I think that's the case for a lot of people on this, but I just wanted to be upfront about that. But I do appreciate like the discussion. And I think I probably agree with like, probably like 90% of what Larry said, but I wouldn't be quite as critical because I do think that like, even though there might be some stumbling and some mistakes that the, like the, it's intending to do something that's good and necessary. I don't think it's intended to do what is good and necessary. And that's the difference because I do live within the Catholic church and I don't trust the people that are pushing this because I don't think that their concerns are necessarily as pastorally wonderful as yours. But anyway, all that by the side, I would like to say, you know, there's a Catholic, her name is Dawn Eden Goldstein, who's a lesbian woman who lives a chaste sort of life and all that Catholic, who's long been an advocate for, you know, that whole tradition of the holy friendships and so on. And she's now a big time fan of this new document. I just saw something she wrote the other day. Along the same lines you're talking about here that, and I love Milbank, he's a great theologian and that maybe there is something that, and I've long said too, that I'm open and totally sympathetic with the idea of two gay men that wanna live with each other just out of companionship. I mean, loneliness is a horrible thing. It is a terrible crushing, mind numbing, soul crushing thing, you know? And so I have no problem with people loving each other in holy friendship and all that kind of stuff. And I know there are others in the Catholic side who say, no, too much occasion of sin and all that kind of stuff. Eh, well, maybe that's where my own insouciance might come in a bit. Because I think the desire to overcome loneliness is in fact a way to perhaps pursue a chaste lifestyle even better. It's hard to be chaste when you're super lonely and depressed and all those kinds of things. So I'm not opposed to the notion of a church that is more congenial to those kinds of things and maybe offering up a blessing. But I just think also that the way that this document landed without consultation, without broader Episcopal input, without a years long sort of participation in developing concepts along these lines, and then to end the document and say, and that's it, we're not gonna talk about it anymore, conversation over, just throws this document like a thud into the culture wars and says, okay, now tear each other apart and go for it. And I think given our cultural atmosphere, Catholic progressives are immediately spinning this, it's okay, we're gonna bless the gay marriages now. It's like, oh, well, okay, fine, whatever. Anyway, Julian, you were gonna say something. I read one take that was saying the bit at the end about, there'll be no further word on this, was a kind of nod to the German portion of the church and was saying, you guys wanna go further with blessings? Well, this is how far we are gonna go and notice also how it's kind of reaffirmed the traditional teaching throughout the document. So this is kind of saying, this is actually directed towards the German church. But Julia, yeah, I agree with, I think a lot of people pointed this out. This might be the Vatican trying to get ahead of the Germans or whatnot with something more compassionate than what the church has done before, but not quite as full on full scale gay marriage as the Germans are doing. That's all well and true. I think you're right. But you don't get to play like that anymore. The fact is we have to talk about this. You just can't throw this document out there and say, okay, that's it, we're done talking. Because the document is ambiguous in spots. It's self internally contradictory in spots. We're blessing couples, but not relationships. And we're blessing this part of the relationship, but not that other part of the relationship. And it's a blessing. And we understand it comes from a priest, but it's not really a blessing blessing like Princess Bride. It's mostly dead, not dead dead. It's like mostly a blessing, not really a blessing. I mean, come on, we need to talk about this more. Well, and part of what I've been at in the Christian Reformed Church for a very long time before the YouTube and everything, is that part of what we're struggling with is how something like the Christian Reformed Church or the Roman Catholic Church can actually process these conversations in a healthy way. And so part of Larry, what I appreciated you brought in was of course I didn't have the perspective of, canon law and house synods and the papacy, all those things function together. And so I think religious structures and churches are really wrestling with how do we process this in a way that affords the kind of nuance, the kind of freedom, but yet the kind of order and structure that we also need. And I think many, many churches are wrestling with, structure how to carry this through. And so I see that here. We have to have a deeper conversation about Christian anthropology. What does it mean to be a human being? What is a human being in the light of Jesus Christ? And that has to be an ongoing conversation, big time, because then otherwise we're just talking in deontological terms about this sexual norm and that sexual norm. That all has to be grounded in a much more expansive, sacramental vision, Christological vision of what a human being is. And in that regard, damn, there's a conversation that has to take place. Holy cow, we've just started scratching the surface of that conversation. Well, I wonder Larry, if like the entire issue isn't like downstream from a more general crisis in chastity as a concept, because let's not pretend that the heterosexual world doesn't have a struggle with chastity in our time. It's almost like 20 years after we started exposing pornography to children, we're having a crisis of sexuality in the West. Who could have seen this coming? Well, yeah, almost as this. Exactly, oh my God, yes. I think somebody, I can't remember who it was, said that, most married people in the West have no right to be finger wagging towards gays or whatever, given the fact that for the past 60, 70 years, we've just given a wink and a nod to divorce culture, cohabitation culture, let's have sex in the back seat of my car, well, then high school culture. Yeah, the heterosexuals have no corner on chastity. Well, we have ads with hypersexualized 70 year olds, and we think that's normal. Or hypersexualized 14 year olds, and think that's normal, and just put that out there. Crazy. Yeah, I know I agree with you, Nate, 100%. And I'm very traditional in terms of sexual morality and stuff. I believe in Thomistic virtue ethics and Thomistic natural law theory and all that as the sort of basing point upon which moral theology has to build. But the Second Vatican Council called for also a reform in that kind of moral theology to take into greater consideration certain phenomenological categories, subjective categories and so forth, motivations. And Father Survey Pinkhares delivered. Go ahead, Father. Father Survey Pinkhares delivered. Exactly, Survey Pinkhares has written a series of wonderful books that have reformed moral theology along those lines, in terms of virtue ethics and so on, that I think are really wonderful. But anyway, I do have to run into, go ahead. Yeah, I wonder if traditionalists or conservatives in the conversation would acknowledge that, I mean, we often emphasize that the church has had a consistent moral teaching for 2,000 years or whatever. But the fact is, when it comes to how we treat homosexuality, how we think about homosexuality, our thinking has changed. And I think in ways that we have to acknowledge are better. And so you sometimes hear people saying, yeah, I think you mentioned this earlier, Larry, of how people like to say, well, in the African context, this is just not an issue in terms of accepting homosexuality, but they have other issues. And so I wonder- Polygamy. Yeah, well, I was thinking more in terms of homophobia. But I wonder- Well, that too, yeah. I mean, how does something like thinking of sexual orientation change the conversation? Or how does thinking of homosexuality as something that shouldn't be criminalized or the possibility of civil unions or that kind of thing? I wonder how all of that fits into the conversation as well. I think it's all part of the conversation. Sexual orientation. To me, that's, I don't know, we could talk at length about this. I know people that are involved in the psychology of human sexuality. One of my best friends in the world, psychologist who deals with this kind of stuff, and he's really secular, very agnostic. But he bristles at the idea that sexual orientation is this essentialized thing, reified thing, that becomes ensconced in a human being. And he's not in favor of conversions there. He's not saying that. What he's saying is- Well, that's what the queer movement is saying as well. Yeah, it's saying that there is just so much fluidity. Within certain boundaries, there's all this fluidity that takes place. And so we have to sort of avoid these reification. But all that is part of the conversation. The simply the psychology of human affectations, human subjective sexual orientations and so on. That's all gotta be part of the conversation. But also the church's traditional more teaching has to be part of the conversation. In my experience, more often than not, it's precluded from the conversation from the get-go, from the opening bell. No, you're just out of bounds. You're not allowed into the conversation because you don't play by our ground rules. And I think that's the problem. I can maybe understand where that's coming from because maybe of a certain history of hurt. But still, I often feel disenfranchised in conversations because, well, you don't immediately acknowledge the full justice owed to this community. I think, well, what do you have to say? And my point of view is that this is no time for caution. That in the West, all of the worldly principalities and powers are pushing this as hard as they can. And actually, it's gonna hurt people. And we need to be bold in proclaiming the goodness of God's plans for marriage and sexuality and all that. At the same time, helping people bear their crosses. And speaking of that, I've gotta go help somebody bear their cross. That's what that phone call was about. Oh, okay. Well, thank you, Father. Thank you, Father. Thanks for having me. I have to go soon too, but I wanna end with this, which is this is a very complex, very, very complex conversation in so many levels. My best friend in the world, I grew up with in my neighborhood of Lincoln, Nebraska, is a gay guy. He lives in Brooklyn now. I'm not gonna mention his name because he basically happens to listen to this. But God, I've known him now for 60 years. And I remember I was in Rome. I was there to study abroad with my students and he tagged along. He lived in my apartment for three weeks, free apartment in Rome for three weeks. He loved it. So by the way, no one can accuse me of being a homophobe. I had a gay man living in my apartment with me for three weeks. All right. So anyway, we got into these great conversations. And at one point in the conversation, he said something, and he's an actively gay guy, atheist, the whole secular thing. And he said to me, because I was talking about, maybe I could learn some things from you about the evolution of Christian ideas and so forth on this. And he goes, here's what I want you to know. And this shocked me. He goes, I don't want the Catholic church to change at all. I want it to be compassionate and all that, but I don't want it to change his teaching. Because he says, I'll tell you why. Because it's important to me, even as an actively gay atheist man who has no moral values. I mean, he has got moral value. He meant no sort of dogmatic sexual strictures. I'm glad that your baseline is there. I'm glad that it's there. And I don't want it to go away because I think that it's important. And that just blew me. What that showed me was just how enormously complex human beings are, and therefore how enormously complex motives are and ideologies are and the conversation is. It's enormously complex. You've pointed to conversation before, and I really think that's important because we're really, like the level of conversation, there's not a lot of conversation that happens. There's a lot of shouting ideological points back and forth across culture war divides that happens, but there isn't a lot of serious conversation. And your point about the divide between the West and the global South on this is super important too, because one of the things that's underlying this is like a deeper conflict between modernity and tradition. And we have to sort that out at some point because especially as modernity is collapsing, if we just immediately figure, if our answer is, oh, then tradition must have had it all right. And we go back and we just embrace tradition fully with everything that comes along with it. We'll forget that the Reformation happened for a reason. And that not everything that modernity stands for is a bad thing. And the conversation is how we're gonna negotiate this moving on to whatever's after. That's true. I have to think where I come from. I come from a world that's closer to medieval Catholicism than anyone else in this conversation. And I can affirm tradition does not get it, and it doesn't get everything right, even though it's beautiful in some ways. Yeah. I don't know at what point you came into our earlier show, Nate, but I talked at length, some length anyway, about in Catholicism, we had this great divide between the progressives, but then we have our radical traditionalists who simply wanna say, let's just scorched earth, get rid of the modern world and go back to some sort of romanticized Catholic, something or other from, I don't know, 1850 or 1930. I don't know, I don't know. But it's still modern. Yeah, well, that's the irony of it, right? Let me point that out. That's the irony of it, is how thoroughly modern they are in their thinking in all of this as well. But I tell you what, guys, I do have to run. There's somebody in the car, but I'm running up against a hard break here myself. I've got some things I gotta go do. Well, thank you, Larry. I really appreciate you coming on. It was great to meet you. Oh my God, what a great group of guys. I really enjoyed this conversation. Thank you very much. All right, take care, Larry. Bye-bye. Thanks, Larry. All right, we're gonna land the plane soon here, but I didn't wanna, you know, Chad, after I made liberal use of your video this morning, I wanted to make sure I let you back in. I just have a really weird question because I was reading John, John, verse John or whatever, the one right before Acts this morning. The Gospel of John. Yes, and in there, it talks, it says, like they keep mentioning the disciple that Jesus loved. And like, I don't know, it's just kind of weird because I was like, what does that even mean? Like, I thought like you loved all of them, but why did you love John or whoever it is he's talking about? I don't know if it's Peter or John. I can't tell. Not Peter. Okay, okay, so what does that mean? And how does it relate to this conversation? I don't know how it relates to this conversation, but there's a lot of people that suspect that it was John, the author of the Gospel, I mean, that's part of it. And, you know, in some ways, don't moms love all their kids the same and then they don't? I don't know, I'm not trying, I'm really not trying to be rude on asking. It just struck me because like, I'm trying to prepare for this thing with Neil tonight and I was reading the Gospel of John and I was like, what does that even mean? It just, it's repeated several times. So is this one of those things that has been brought up before but nobody likes to talk about it or what? Well, people like to talk about it. I wouldn't say nobody doesn't like to talk about it, but there's no answer that satisfies a lot of people with respect to it. I read a lot of weird things. So when Chad said in the context of this conversation, my mind went to a different place because there are a lot of people who have a lot of weird fanfic about that whole beloved disciple thing. So. So, well, great conversation, guys. He's kind of gay, but whatever. Thanks, Chad. Bye. Bye, Chad. All right, last thoughts. Great to see you again, Julian. It's always good to see your face, hear your voice. Yeah, it's been too long. Julian was one of the first people I ever had a conversation with. I think I remember, Nate, we had an interaction in the comment section and you were really angry about something and then I kind of commonly responded. I got together with you and Michael and had that conversation on radical orthodoxy. I think so. So what are you viewing up to, Julian? Same thing, basically? Yeah, I'm in my, what is it, second semester of, well, second term of university. So I'm offered a winter break right now. So. Good, what are you studying? English and philosophy, a double major. All right. We just had a class on Aquinas and Wittgenstein, which is an interesting pairing, if you know any of those two guys. Are you enjoying it? Yeah, yeah, I would say, I'd say so. It's university. Yeah, it's fun. Is it a public university or what university are you going to? It's a kind of liberal Christian university, is the way I'd describe it. Okay. Kind of a liberal arts university, but it's really good, really good, kind of really strong in the humanities, kind of really small. Yeah, it's good. Yeah, I kind of think with my interests, a public university wouldn't be as good as a fit because there'd be less kind of theology or philosophy I could say. Here's Nate's family, waiting in. Thank you, Nate. Thank you, Nate. Was I angry? I didn't think it was a real... You were just ranting about something in the comments section. Oh, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha. Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. I can come off angry and taxed in a way if I were saying the same words and you saw my face, it would not seem... Yeah, I think so. I have a rhetorical style that if you're just reading it in text, it can seem angry, but then if I'm saying those same words and you see my face, I'm smiling while I say it. You've probably spent too much time with the David Bentley Heart Circles and it's kind of boring here. I'm sorry. Rhetorical style. Probably. Well, anyway, thank you, thank you, gentle people for joining the live stream. This was a good one. I hope the conversation was good. This was a good one. Yeah, it's so, you're right. I want to have better conversations with respect to this, obviously for my own denomination, but also for the church at large because working our way through this at all the different levels and how the different levels impinge on each other and part of what I think we wrestle with is, you mentioned, don't ask, don't tell. One of the things I think we struggle with is that there is the modernity makes everything upfront. Everything has to be upfront and not everything should be upfront and there has to be a dance of that which is spoken and left unspoken and I think we really struggle with that and I think religious institutions are deeply struggling with that. Well, I think one of the first steps toward having a productive conversation about it is to take the metaphysical nonsensity of gay marriage off the table and just remove it from the discussion because there are ways that we can talk about genuinely like having compassion for homosexual people that don't like undermine the entire symbolism of marriage and the metaphysical structures of the universe. Right, right. Well, and I agree, I remember talking to my kids when Prop 8 came along California and they're talking about gay marriage and I said, I don't really think there's such a thing. Hey, it's like nobody in the ancient world would have, there were plenty of gay relationships, nobody would have connected that with marriage. Now, there's obviously a reason why that was put together and I can understand that but I think you're right Nate, that it doesn't help or support out. I'm not denying the existence of committing and committed and loving gay relationships, that's not what I'm doing at all. I'm just saying whatever it is, it's not a marriage but now let's start the conversation. Hey, it's not a marriage, let's acknowledge that. Now we can start talking about the issue. Go ahead, Joe and you wanna say something? Yeah, I have lots of things to say but I don't know if I can say them. I was thinking of Larry's comment about his friend who appreciates the church as having, the way I was hearing him, as having a stabilizing force and I have to admit that makes me uncomfortable. I can see how the church comes to play this stabilizing role but for me that exists in a kind of tension with what Christianity is supposed to be and so I find myself in this more liberal place and it's uncomfortable, I find it deeply uncomfortable to be the kind of conservative in the room and I find it hard to, I find it uncomfortable to, I'm being vulnerable here, to kind of be responsible I guess would be the way to say it. That's a lot like my experience entering in into Evergreen as a freshman. Well there you're the, you're the. I've been a progressive my whole life and all of a sudden I was the conservative in the room. Oh I see, oh in Evergreen, right. That's been my story in the Christian reform church. Suddenly I'm a conservative, it's like, how did I be, I remember the first guy, he was Mr. Reagan, the guy who became Mr. Reagan before his video, I do this talk with him and he's like, something about, he called me a conservative and I was like, I'm not a conservative but you're making videos about Jordan Peterson, does that make me conservative? Here we are. Yeah, yeah. And so I don't know how to feel about this idea of the church as a sort of stabilizing force because it feels like that kind of creates a tension where on the one hand you have to be sort of propping up these, I mean when it comes to this conversation on the one hand you have to sort of constantly propping up these institutions but on the other hand, you have this kind of radical freedom to love people who are different from you and I'm not talking about homosexual, I'm talking about the Christian freedom to just encounter and love people wherever they're from and I feel a tension between that mode that says, we need to sort of uphold these traditions because they're under threat and this other, what to me is the more Christian mode of, you're sort of free to encounter and to love others. That's kind of the sense of it. I don't know, does that make sense to anyone else? Yeah, just to me, you're gesturing toward the sense of tradition that David Bentley Hart points toward in tradition and apocalypse, right? Where tradition is informed by its final cause and you want stability but you don't want stagnation so that's the trick. If your view of tradition is only backward looking about what has come before, you run the risk of stagnation and you miss a movement toward the final cause that is actually the more critical way of understanding what a tradition is because it only is what it is when it's become what it is to be. And what you pointed out too, I mean, it's so interesting to me and I love the way you said it, Nate. I mean, there's a lot of people in our realms who are like, oh, the Protestant Reformation had only never happened. It's like, no, sorry, that Reformation was happening all over the place. That was a big breakage. That's sort of like the San Francisco earthquake but there are lots of other earthquakes going on within and out, say out the Catholic institution but these questions that you pointed to Julian in terms of Larry's friend saying, yeah, I want this to stay the same over here but you're saying that as someone who is not living within it. And he's probably saying that as someone who appreciates having this stable tradition in order to push against, like that he enjoys that. He likes being in the, oh, okay, I'm in the critical. I like that you guys are sort of doing your own thing over here because I like pushing against it. And the reason I was asking about blessing was because of course one of the big differences, okay, I'm a Christian reform minister. I'm not a priest and in the conversations about women in church office and these kind of, I keep pointing to the fact that I am not a priest is a different thing than what I am. We have the priesthood of all believers. And so when it comes to this blessing question, it's, and again, I don't have any, here's the solution, I'm not handing out solutions to people. I'm just saying, just pay attention to these other pieces that are around there because they are impacting all of this that we're talking about. And to at least know a few of the other things in this dark room maybe means you won't bump your toe or at least bash somebody else's head into a piece of furniture. So stop the live stream pounds on that door. What's the matter, Joe, are we keeping you up? We're talking too loud. We should stop the live stream. But thank you all, it was so good to see you, Julian. Good to see you again, Julian. Yeah, it would be lovely to see more of you guys but I'm always busy with something else these days. But yeah. All right, take care, y'all. See you. Bye bye.