https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=PQITtc-PlZk

 Pastor, I think I might have committed the unforgivable sin. This is probably not the most common remark I get from people but it comes up with a fair amount of regularity. It's surprisingly or perhaps not surprisingly common to hear people say that and they'll say it for a whole variety of reasons. Some thought or some action now makes them feel that they're in danger of the fires of hell and we have this verse and we're gonna read it today out of the Gospel of Mark where Jesus talks about the unforgivable sin and it's it's as if there's somehow this this big red button somewhere and everybody keeps looking at it and somebody looks at it and looks at it looks at then pushes it and says oh no I push it I've committed the unforgivable sin I'm lost. So we're gonna talk about that today. Let's contextualize it a little bit because the context of it is important. The concern is located in a particular worldview complete with a whole group of assumptions. Often I'll hear people say things like the world is a giant sorting system where you perform or fail or fail you perform or fail to perform to either win eternity in Beverly Hills or spend eternity in some third-world slump heaven or hell and the Bible is a book of rules and if you follow the rules you get rewarded with this and if you fail the rules you get punished with that and but there's this one real tricky thing that if you hit that boom you're done. It's kind of like a game show. This is a variation of what I call common religion and and the game is to get to the good place and to avoid the bad place and they go on forever and in fact you'll there's a TV show on right now called The Good Place and they've been playing with these ideas. The anxious fear of you being beyond redemption is really what drives it. People do bad things in this world and not just them genocidal dictators and most of you know this and the truth is that either you know that you have done bad things or you know that people have done bad things against you and if you think you're the situation where you've always done good and people have only done bad against you I'll dare bet there are people out there that will say that you've done bad against them. Cruelty and evil are common. We are often most cruel to people within our own homes. People will say things to family members they wouldn't dare say to strangers on the street. This is part of the reason that the internet can become such a cesspool because sometimes people can hide behind behind anonymity and do the most despicable terrible things. It's a factor of how we are but generally speaking we learn to hide our shadows and we usually try to hide them from ourselves. Some of the greatest evils are stealthy. Sins of omission slide under the radar and and some of those sins of omission can be just as bad as a sin of commission. Self-righteousness which often appears like morality and moral goodness and may in fact be the person who is morally good is much more likely to be self-righteous. People who feel themselves to be above average above average performance but it binds heavy burdens on the others who struggle to perform and so the idea that we're beyond redemption it's not unfounded. Now the Gospel of Mark is the shortest of all it's the briefest of the four Gospels and what's nice about going through the Gospel of Mark is that you can go through a bunch of stories within the time it takes to preach a 30-minute sermon and so that's kind of nice about this series. Now in chapters one through the beginning of three that we've read so far Jesus crashes into the scene and becomes this instant celebrity and this entire movement grows up around him incredibly quickly and and you get the picture he can't get a moment's peace anywhere the crowd is continuing to follow him. Demonic forces have plagued the people with insanity and Jesus is releasing them from that bondage. Now whether you're on the side where you think that that's demons or you're on the side that you're saying it's mental illness in either case the miracles are amazing and everybody sees it and and friends and loved ones who have suffered with infirmity suffered with unclean spirits or mental illness or or all varieties of things have been released by Jesus and the crowd just wants more more more more more healing and forgiving in ways that sacramentally embody the invading kingdom of God. That's what we talked about last week. Now the world invasion, the world there's the Christianity often says that there are three main enemies that we have the devil our sinful human nature and the world and in this case the world which is the Jewish world the world that he's embedded within first century Judaism is responding to his invasion as a threat. Jesus is Jesus is disturbing. Jesus is is changing the dynamics in the Holy Land. He is interrupting the normal patterns of behavior and when that happens subconsciously many of us want to have things go back to normal and so at the end of last week's story he looked around at them in anger. He was in the synagogue and the religious authorities did not want him to to heal this man on the Sabbath. He was grieved at the hardness of their heart and said to the man stretch out your hand. He stretched it out and his hand was restored. The Pharisees went out and immediately conspired with the Herodians against him how to destroy him. So Jesus has gotten enough attention that people want him dead and Jesus departed with his disciples to the sea. Now I was quite annoyed this week when I found a number of the biblical translations that I look at saying departed to the lake because the lake breaks the symbolic resonance of the sea and we've talked about this in past sermons where the the sea is this realm of potential chaos out of which in Genesis 1 God brings habitable order by his word. He organizes the world out of chaos and the the disciples are catchers of men because they are catchers of fish who ply the chaotic sea with boats. These are exactly the kind of men Jesus are looking for. So from the chaos of the town he goes to the chaos of the sea and a great multitude from Galilee follow him and and there's there's there's symbolic resonance between the varieties of fish in the sea and the varieties of multitudes that are following him. Hearing all that he was doing they came to him in great numbers from Judea, Jerusalem, Edomia that's that's the old Edom. Beyond the Jordan the Transjordan people are coming from enormous distances. There's no cars okay people are walking these are taking animals. People are coming from enormous distances because they hear about him. He has grown this big and so the system is going to kick back. He told his disciples to have a boat ready for him because of the crowd so that they would not crush him. He couldn't even be in their midst they would it was just too dangerous so he would actually have to go a little bit out into the sea of chaos to be protected from the chaos of the crowd. For he had cured many so that all who had diseases pressed up to touch him. Again as we've seen in previous lessons the the touch is so vital because in the in the ancient Israelite system uncleanliness is conveyed by touch and so with Jesus he's so powerful purification is conveyed by his touch and that doesn't happen usually contamination is conveyed by touch but with Jesus purification is conveyed by touch so everybody will look to grab him and to hold him. Whenever unclean spirits saw him they just have to see him. They fell down before him and shouted you are the son of God. Now that wasn't the title Jesus was using. He was using son of man and so he shut them up. He sternly ordered them not to make him known. Well you would think wouldn't Jesus want everybody to know that? Jesus was embodying thy kingdom come thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven in their presence and the unclean spirits knew that they would have to flee just as the withered hand just as the leprosy just as everything else because Jesus was there. Then he went up to the mountain. Again this isn't just telling us geography. This is this is symbolic here. Now he goes up to the mountain. The mountain is the place where where Moses meets God. The mountain is the the top of the hierarchy where revelation comes from and he called to them him those whom he had wanted and they came to him. He was picking and choosing between them and he appointed 12 whom he had all who he also named apostles obviously the number 12 symbolic of the 12 tribes of Israel. They would be new Israel and they were the apostles the sent ones to be with him to learn from him and to be sent out to proclaim the message. They now were to embody Jesus. He was multiplying himself by 12 and they were have to have the authority to cast out demons. They were going to do the deliverance that Jesus had been doing. He's multiplying himself by 12. So he appointed the 12 Simon to whom he named Peter, James the son of Zebedee and John the brother of James to whom he gave the name Bonurgies that is sons of thunder and Andrew and Philip and Bartholomew and Matthew and Thomas and James the son of Alphaeus. Remember we've met Levi son of Alphaeus and whether this James and Levi is the same person or a brother we don't know. He seemed to have called quite a few brothers and Thaddeus and Simeon the Canaanian. Now this Canaanian he's a zealot and and Judas Iscariot who might also be a zealot. We're not quite sure but notice the diversity within these 12. They represent the culture war factions and Jesus has now colonized them all and they will be his representatives to go out into Israel with this message with this deliverance from demons with this deliverance from uncleanness with this healing power. And you would think well these people should be you shouldn't be able to get these 12 people in a room and have them in fact be able to keep polite company with each other but no that's not the way it's going to be. Jesus just like he overpowers the demons just like he overpowers illness he overpowers the political divides that are between the people and he even includes within him within them the one who would betray him. Jesus is setting up the story. Then he went home and the crowds came together so that he could not eat. He can't even eat. When his family heard it they went out to restrain him. They're like this is not right. This stuff happening with with Jesus our brother this isn't right. We've got to put a stop to it. For the people were saying he's out of his mind. He's crazy. I just made a video about Alex Jones. He's a shaman. He's doing different things and everybody's trying to account for Jesus and so then a new theory arises and the scribes who came down from Jerusalem said he has Beelzebub and by the ruler of demons he's casting out demons. He must have that kind of power. He must be a strong demon in order to cast out the little demons. But why would Jesus be aligning the people sacramentally thy kingdom come thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Why would he be bringing heaven down to earth reconciling heaven and earth. And he came to them and he called them to him and spoke to them in parables. How can Satan cast out Satan? If a kingdom is divided against itself that kingdom cannot stand and if a house is divided against itself that house will not be able to stand. If the demons run their camp like this you have nothing to worry about my friends. And if Satan is risen up against himself and is divided he cannot stand. Well notice all of the different factions in the culture war within Jesus tribe. Jesus has overcome illness. He's overcome the demons. He's overcome the political tensions and he's saying no this kind of unification this is not Satan. No one can enter a strong man's house and plunder his property without first tying up the strong man. Then indeed the house can be plundered. Jesus is the plunderer. He has invaded the chaos of this world and he is bringing thy kingdom come thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven to the streets of Capernaum and to the shores of Galilee and people from all over are finding him and they're eating it up. And others are sure that this disturbance of the civil order this disturbance of of the normal gray city peace is a problem and it's got to be stopped. We've got to get back to the status quo. We've got to go back to our own petty rivalries where at least we know who the characters are. We can't have anyone come and disrupting this. Truly I tell you people will be forgiven for their sins and whatever blasphemies they utter. So what's usually forgotten is that's an incredible passage. People will be forgiven for their sins and whatever blasphemies they other but whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit can never be forgiven. There it is. It's the unforgivable sin but is guilty of an eternal sin for they have said he has an unclean spirit that's somehow connected to why are you calling the work of Jesus the work of the devil. Now in many trans in many times in translation you can get a pretty credible translation and they all sort of agree but there are certain passages that are just really hard to translate and this is one of them. So here's a little cleaning up or upping the resolution on this translation for you. Truly I tell you that all sins and the blasphemies that all the sins and the blasphemies will be forgiven the sons of men. See if you go back and you look at the NRSV which I adopted because of the the sea instead of the lake instead of the NIV even they kind of take the edge off verse 28. We look at verse 28 that's this this LEB translation is a little bit closer to the Greek. Truly I tell you that all the sins and blasphemies will be forgiven the sons of men. So when I was studying this you know when you find a verse like this you go back and you read it in Greek and you see the words like this you go back and you read it in Greek and you say wow English sure didn't have that impact all of the sins will be forgiven. Really? You're you're you're you're you're forgiving sin that generously? Yes but whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit does not have pardon into the age. That's really what it says. Well what does that mean? The reason the reason English translations don't render it that way is because no one would understand it. Well they believed in two ages. There's the present age the present evil age I call it the age of decay and then the age to come. So so someone who blasphemes against the Holy Spirit what do you mean by that? Blasphemes against the work of the Holy Spirit well what do you mean by that? Someone what is blasphemy? Blasphemy is speaking against the work of Jesus. Now we're looking at this passage in this context because in the Gospel of Mark the context is about the mounting opposition to Jesus and the blindness of the people to what he's actually doing. They don't get it and what they're redo they're doing is they're blaspheming against what Jesus is doing is saying the work I'm doing is the work of the Holy Spirit of God and they're not going to get pardon if they keep resisting this but is liable to the sin of the age. You can look at that in some different ways it can it can very easily mean sin of the age basically unforgivable that's that's how it's often rendered but the point here is not so much that again there's some secret landmine that if you step on you lose the game instead of playing the rules and seeing if you can you know either rig the rules or find the loopholes or somehow get out of it. No that's that's not what all is going on here it's Jesus has come and you'd better get on his side all the stuff you've done can be forgiven that's not a problem all these things that you're thinking oh this is the unforgivable sin put it out of your mind that's not what this is about. Jesus is saying I'm invading and you'd better get on the right side of history because I am history and he says this because they're saying he has an unclean spirit and what he's saying is if you keep saying no to me if you keep resisting me someday when I'm sitting as judge you're going to face me and if you're going to be my enemy now you're probably going to be my enemy then and you might not like how that goes well well that that that doesn't sound very Jesusy that doesn't sound very nice and his mothers and his brothers came and standing outside they sent to him and called him and a crowd sitting around him and they said to him your mother and your brothers are and your sisters are outside asking for you and he replied who are my mothers and my brothers and looking at those who sat around him he said here are my mothers and my brothers whoever does the will of God is my mother and brother and sister and mother well why does this verse come here why after what he just said Jesus has just drawn a line in the sand and said there are finally two groups in history those who are with me and those who don't want to be with me now if you go into this this question of a house divided that plays into it here too because Jesus basically says there's two there's a line down the middle of the world on one side it has everyone together as a body and on the side it has everyone fragmented and alone there's a line in the sand in history everyone with Jesus as their head all together united undivided unlike Satan's house we're not going to fix that hang on unlike Satan's house that's why this is rough draft for Sunday because I got to fix things up for Sunday because I got to fix things up everyone who does the will of God is united as my brother and sister see all these verses are tied together see the mountain the the opposition the fragmented opposition oh he's from Satan this is Satan pulling apart his own house no that's not how things work this is his family he's lost his mind now he hasn't lost his mind these are my brothers and sisters well in that culture that meant yeah this is family that's not family well what's on the other side everyone by themselves being their own self-salvationists being their own savior and lord this house cannot stand the big picture is that the kingdom is advancing thy kingdom come thy will be done as earth as it is as it is in heaven as it is in heaven but we don't want it we we well Jesus um you're you're messing up the the family stuff that we had family's important yeah family's important but this comes first Jesus you're you're messing up our our religious stuff yeah religion is important but this comes first we we don't want withered hands don't we want withered hands mended well yeah but maybe in our tribe but we don't want that happening in other tribes we don't want those with unclean spirits released from bondage well well yeah but but maybe sometimes no why don't we want it we didn't want it in the first place that's the point of the story of the garden of adam and eve of of of eden and adam and eve they didn't want it in the first place we got into this mess from wanting what we had there were two there were two trees in the garden and the only there were many trees in the garden but there were two special trees in the garden and and the only tree we were told we we weren't allowed to eat from is the one we picked that's telling about us there there is something to which we must submit there is someone we will need to trust in more than ourselves there is someone else's vision of the world we will have to live in and we don't like it we want this world to be ours we're really annoyed by god and we'd like him to either become our servant or step aside thank you i want to see s lewis's books the great divorce begins in a world where anyone can get whatever they want just by thinking of it well that must be heaven the ghosts or shades are on a bus and they're all bickering with their petty agendas for how the world should be set right according to their tastes and many are posturing themselves as aggrieved victims they've oh oh the world is so unjust it's done us so wrong and if everyone would only listen to me then life would be great and it would all be wonderful when they get to heaven they can't stand it it's too solid the grass hurts everything hurts everything presses against them and they don't have the strength to instill their will upon it all their complaints are filled with their own self-righteousness and they get back on the bus and they go back to the other place well what's the place well it's a place where you can have anything you want just by thinking of it it's yours you want a maserati poof you want to you want a famous piece of art poof one person on the bus complains if we if we only had limitation here in heaven then we could inhale or in this in this gray city then we could establish our real economy but everyone could have everything just by thinking of it so he says well then nothing's of value so i'm going to go back to i'm going to go up to heaven i'm going to steal something concrete i'm going to try and bring it back and so that one scene in the movie there's a ghost trying his best to lift an apple because he wants to get it back on the bus and bring it back and the and one of the one of the bright ones there says that that um that apple's way too big because that little that world you're going back to is tiny tiny tiny well why is it so tiny it didn't look tiny from the inside it's tiny because you are tiny you need a big world that is bigger than you but you're too small to govern it it needs to be governed by someone way way bigger and that's how you'll find your joy it's a perfectly libertarian place you can make demands of things but that power doesn't work on people so what happens is people keep building their dream houses it's like the hgtv gone amok just further and further and further and further and further out and sometimes people get there and i want to find someone really famous yeah you're gonna have to walk a long ways it's gonna take you years don't worry you've got plenty of time until the darkness comes in 1966 there were 3.36 people per household in america in 2018 there's 2.53 we're spreading out well yeah it's a function of family size but it's also a function of matter of divorce rates and people not marrying and people not having children and having the affluence that can afford it we're spreading out because we can't tolerate each other give us unlimited time and power that's what we always think we need if i only had more time if i only had more money if i only had more power then no then we would have exactly the picture c.s lewis creates because that is how we are so when jesus comes along he's problematized the crowd thinks the world could be fixed if only jesus would give them more more miracles more healings more deliverance if you multiply loaves and fishes if i bring in my money can you multiply that can you multiply my coins can you multiply my lands can you multiply my wives can you multiply my children can you multiply my flocks the religious leaders become insecure because of his popularity he's taking their show he's taking their gig nobody's going to listen to them when jesus is around and so you have to do a reputational hit job on him oh this is just this is just the devil no it's not the devil and then his family comes he's broken the good jewish family script and the family wants to protect him from himself and this is our story we problematize jesus when we see him in the way that he's the stumbling stone which he really is because he is not our tool to get what we want so jesus will be abandoned even by his friends jesus will become the scapegoat of a generation through whose death even political rivals will agree it will be for the common good they can't agree on what the common good is but they can agree it's closer without jesus only by going all the way finding that his death has not solved anything in the way they thought and seeing how all of them are the problem in their earnest quest to fix the world their way the family values that have to be promoted jesus we've got to take charge of you you're not showing good family values listen to listen to your family the religious leaders jesus get in line it's our show don't upstage us the common people oh democracy populism jesus listen to us listen to the crowd do what we demand we'll give you riches we'll give you fame we'll become your army we'll put you on top of our pyramid you will be our man but the problem is jesus will be no one else's man ever because he is the man ever because he is the man might they see they need him might they see that what they really need to do is bow and worship and follow him and submit to him what is your pet vision for fixing the world you've got one we all do we imagine maybe it's political maybe it's economic maybe it's social maybe it's some some little idea maybe they're all great ideas maybe they're better ideas than everybody else's idea holding on to this vision may be resisting the advancing work of the spirit of god the unforgivable sin well see it's not a thing that you do in a moment it's how you position yourself with respect to jesus the unforgivable sin is less obvious than you thought it's not simply murder or adultery or treason it's more obvious than you thought it's the sin beneath both the obvious and the socially acceptable sins it's the way you're going to fix the world the sin of finally demanding of god that you be given your own little universe to govern it will ultimately become a you will ultimately become a universe of one and one is the loneliest number that you'll ever do that's where this goes so choosing to finally and ultimately resist god's invitation out of your own self-salvationism is the unforgivable sin what if you win and god gives in god will finally say to you your will be done congratulations you beat god now go everyone with jesus is over here they won't bother you i won't let you bother them go will you get along with everybody else who has all their own ideas you may think at heaven but god and everyone else will probably call it hell because no other individual will be in the same place as you because at some point you'll find a difference and only one of you can be god you'll be stuck by and with yourself forever or there's the other way