https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=WgNQ2flNKyw

 Hi, this is Paul and joining me today is Sid Helema. Sid is, well, Sid I'm going to let you introduce yourself. How would you like to be introduced? Well, I'm currently serving as the team leader for Faith Formation Ministries, which is a ministry of the Christian Reformed Church in North America. I kind of see it as one of the final seasons of my working life, so to speak. I've served as a professor at Dort College and a professor chaplain at Redeemer University. And it's a lovely calling to, at this stage in my life, be developing a new ministry for the denomination. So what is Faith Formation? Well, the first thing I'm always drawn to is in Galatians 4, where in exasperation, and I picture Paul almost throwing his hands in the air, says to the legalistic Galatians, Don't you know that you are my dear children, for whom I am again in the pains of childbirth until Christ is formed in you. And I just love that cry of the heart. And ideally, I think it should be called Christ Formation, but I understand why it's called Faith Formation. And it's both personal and communal, that we're called as communities to be transformed into the image of Christ for the good of his world. Now, a lot of the people that listen to my channel identify as atheists or agnostic. When they hear that, they're probably going to think, well, I really like your emphasis on Christ Formation rather than Faith Formation, because I think that focuses it better. But what do you mean by being formed into Christ? Well, first of all, there's Christ in Jesus and that whole complicated thing. So what do you mean being formed into Christ? Well, I love Paul's language of… This Paul is the Apostle Paul from the New Testament? Right, right, the Apostle Paul. Where at a number of points, most notably in Colossians 3, he speaks of dying to the old self and putting on the new self. And I find it fascinating that the very popular speaker today, Jordan Peterson, uses that similar language as kind of central to our walk, though he doesn't come at it as an explicit Christian, so to speak. But just recognizing that we are born with a goal in mind to recognize that there's a lot of brokenness within us and that it's important for us to be introspective, inward-looking, to see those things in us that are called to die or to be diminished, and to recognize that to be fully human… I love the phrase from Irenaeus, a second century church leader, where he says, the glory of God is seen in humankind fully alive. And so I believe faith formation is that journey of recognizing the brokenness in oneself and putting on what the scriptures call the character of Christ or the mind of Christ, growing in what the scriptures call the fruit of the spirit of love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control, that sort of thing. And like, if we were to translate that into… Because we are going to talk about Jordan Peterson, that's the conversation we're going to have today, but in kind of Petersonian language, he often uses to get rid of the dead wood. And so that would be the taking off, getting rid of that dead wood, burning it away, and then the new growth, which is the growth into Christ. Talk a little bit more about burning away. What does that look like? What does that feel like? That sounds painful. Well, it is painful. It is painful. I love the way C.S. Lewis describes it in Mere Christianity, where he's actually quoting a friend of his, where he says, imagine that you are a house under construction. And at first it seems like kind of a fun little project going on, and then you realize that walls are being ripped out and such things. And to put it from metaphorical to practical language, to recognize in my own heart the impulses to put myself on the throne, to make myself the center of the universe, to seek my own agenda at the expense of others, and to see this in me, this intertwining of, on the one hand, wanting to put on the fruit of the spirit that I mentioned earlier and to seek noble aims, for us recognizing as well the desire to look good, to be manipulative, to not be completely honest and vulnerable with others. So there's so much when one looks inward that one can see needs to be burned away. Now, one of the questions I get often is, okay, Pastor, so you're a pastor and you're talking about Jordan Peterson online. Are other pastors aware of Jordan Peterson? Are they thinking about Jordan Peterson? And then Sid and I, we first met face to face at a conference that Sid did out in Sacramento for one of our sister churches, Granite Springs Church, with our Sierra Leadership Network program that myself and Kevin Adams do together. And so then I mentioned Jordan Peterson to Sid and his eyes kind of lit up, and I said, well, let's have a conversation. He says, well, let me get a chance to study up. So this is proof that there's another Christian Reformed pastor who is interested in Jordan Peterson. So Sid, Jordan Peterson, come across your view and what were some of your first impressions? About a year ago, I had coffee with a church leader in our classes, and he mentioned to me how intrigued he was by Jordan Peterson's writing and also his YouTube presentations. Since then, others in my circle have become intrigued by what he's saying as well. And since you and I chatted two and a half months ago, I've done a little bit of a personal immersion. And I've been very struck by, I believe that he's coming in through a different door than I as a Christian Reformed person normally use to engage the Christian faith with others. But I've also come to conclude that this different door that he's using is urgently needed today, has great benefits for the church today. And I would even go so far as to say that I, and I'll speak for the context I'm familiar with, that every Christian Reformed pastor and leader and anyone engaged in faith formation would benefit from listening to Peterson and having some kind of an internal conversation with those around them or others. It's not about agreeing with him, it's about recognizing that he's bringing a unique door into the Christian faith that I think is badly needed in the context that I'm familiar with, the Christian Reformed denomination. I am very relieved to hear that because I always think of myself as a little nuts. And so with this whole Jordan Peterson thing that has changed my life in the last eight months, sometimes I stop and think, am I doing this right? Should I be doing this? Am I going way out on the fringe? So to have a, although Sid, truth be told, I know that even though you've got a solid following and a very respectable job in the Christian Reformed church, I know you're also known as someone who tends to go out on limbs a little bit sometimes too. We can be nuts together. Okay. So that was pretty significant what you just said. Why? I really love the way you put it in terms of another door. And I don't think this is true just of the Christian Reformed church. Right. But what, okay, so what is he, talk a little bit more about that, flesh that out a little bit more for me. So he comes to the conversation as a very well-read scholar, as a clinical psychologist with a long history of personal practice, and as someone who's extremely passionate about changing people's lives. He's an evangelist. He's got evangelists written all over him. And the way he integrates his academic background, his counseling background, and his life experience and then brings those three threads together with the mission of changing the people's lives of those whom he addresses, I find quite astounding. I would call him the kind of contemporary Billy Graham. He will say that after every talk, people line up to meet him and talk to him. And it's his version of the altar call. It really is. Yeah. And people explicitly say that his one purpose is to improve people's lives. So that's one thing to say. Secondly, he talks at length about the Bible as the orienting document for Western civilization. He doesn't do much with going beyond, you know, into a more global perspective, which I would like to hear him do sometime. And then he just raves about the way, he talks about the Bible as the most hyperlinked document ever written, that there are 65,000 cross-references within it, that it's a product of communities over many generations engaging with what he calls reality. And then he works with the logos in Genesis 1 and John 1 as that which brings order to chaos and then he basically makes an evangelistic call that each of us would take responsibility for following the logos in bringing order into the chaos of our own lives and the chaos inside of us. And I got to kind of laugh a little bit, but I see embedded in his approach significant reform doctrines. I think he has his own version of total depravity, that life is suffering and we're a mess inside and we've got to deal with it. His own version of sanctification. He says in one of his podcasts with Joe Rogan, folks, the heart of the matter is you've got to take up your cross and carry it up the hill, which is probably the most profound summary of the four gospels. And he regularly talks about dying and rising. So I just find that his down-to-earth gritty matter of dealing with human responsibility in our context and his lament of worldviews that deny human responsibility or suppress it is very refreshing and encouraging. And basically it challenges me to be more down-to-earth and real in the way that I engage scriptures with communities. Now, as someone, I know when you have a job like faith formation, you're a team leader for faith formation. So it's not just your job. You lead a team of people in the denomination that are working on this. And then you listen to Peterson and you hear all of these things that, and I think we would both agree, that there are a lot of alignments between what he's saying and that's what I heard right away too when I started listening to it, I thought there are a lot of alignments with our reformed approach to Christianity, listening to Peterson. In terms of his, now have you read 12 Rules for Life now? Yes, I have. From a faith formation perspective, what are some of your thoughts about how he's setting this up and what he's doing? Well, I love your word alignment. So I'll piggyback on that and use some alignment language. So the title of the book is 12 Rules for Life, Bringing Order to Chaos. And I'm reminded of the role of law in the Pentateuch, that I give you these words today that you might have life. And in the Christian walk, the way the Lord orders and directs our steps are towards great greater life. One of my life orienting verses is John 10, 10, I've come that you may have life and have it to the full. And I hear Jordan in his own way trying to further that call through these 12 rules. And by the way, let me just say as a footnote, it's a long book, but there's a 90 minute YouTube talk in which he summarizes the entire book. And for those who prefer oral discourse to reading 500 pages, it's a pretty good summary in his YouTube talk. But at any rate, each of the 12 embodies in some way or aligns in some way with Christian teaching. For example, put your own house in order first before trying to correct everybody else. And Peter, the epistle of Peter, right? Judgment begins with the household of God. It's all over the scriptures. Our primary task in the Christian life is to align ourselves with the heart of God and do the work that that entails. Or I love the one where he says, don't compare yourself to others, compare your present self to your past and future self. And then that again, to me, it's a version of 2 Corinthians 3 that we are being transformed from glory into glory, or John 21 where Peter, this little comical ending to the gospel, right? Peter says to Jesus, what about him? And Jesus says, don't worry about him, you just follow me. So I can find echoes of scripture in each of the 12 rules that Jordan lays out. So when you think about, well, one question I've had from people, because again, nobody, it's hard to get in touch with Jordan Peterson because now he's so immensely sought after and I'm easier to get in touch with Jordan Peterson. So people bring their stuff to me. One of the questions I get often from pastors and people who are interested in this is they say, should this, could 12 rules for life be used as a book study in a church context? What are your thoughts on that? I would say absolutely yes. I actually spoke with someone last month whose church did that. They convened a group of about 10 people and went through it chapter by chapter together. And I think I would just add this. I would encourage any church group that does it to appoint someone or rotate or whatever that for each chapter, someone does what you call the alignment work that says, oh, here are significant ways in which the teachings of this chapter align with biblical teachings. And here are perhaps some divergences that we might want to be aware of. I find another one of my life verses, which by the way is also significant for Jordan Peterson, is that Proverbs 27 is iron sharpens iron. So one person sharpens another. And he has said too that his goal in his teaching is to learn from his audiences, that he's continually eliciting feedback and noticing things and that after every time that happens, he revises his own thinking. And I think that's the approach the church needs today as well. And I would encourage church groups to go through the book, taking it as one piece of iron, sharpening our own iron, and then discerning through that sharpening where we might benefit and where we might say, well, no, no, I don't think we want to go there. Which to me is a big part of what following Jesus involves. Now another, probably the most common, so I get a lot of email now from people who are watching Jordan Peterson. And they've tried sending an email to Jordan Peterson, but again, there's millions of people that want to talk to him. But just a tiny group of people want to talk to me. And so they send me emails. And the most common question I get, most common story I get is something like this. I was an atheist. And I maybe grew up in the church a little bit, just a tiny little smattering of Christianity presented to me. And then my parents had a divorce or something. So we didn't go to church anymore. And so then I've been living my life. And now they're somewhere in their 20s or their 30s. And they've listened to Sam Harris and this reason scientific, that was all. But now they're getting, they're not yet in middle age yet. They're reaching the end of their 20s. They're getting to 30. And they're listening to Jordan Peterson. And they are not so sure about this picture of the world that says everything is facts. And if we get our facts aligned reasonably, we can provide for ourselves the things that we want. In fact, they get to the point of saying, I'm not even so sure of myself that the things I want are necessarily what I really want. And they've gotten a little bit more life experience or they've, you know, in their 20s they did too many drugs. They were promiscuous. And you and I as pastors understand it's a very common story. So now they've been listening to Jordan Peterson and they hear what he's saying. And they say, I'm interested. I'm curious about God. I'm curious about the Bible. And I kind of want to believe what should I do next? So if someone sent you that letter, Sid, what might be some things you might respond with? Well, one of my takeaways from Paul's missionary journeys, the Apostle Paul in the Book of Acts, which is in the New Testament, is that whenever he came to a new community, he tried to discern what the common ground was between the message that he brought and what was living in that community. And I think that's a very important conversational principle. So if I received an email like the one that you just mentioned, I would begin by inviting the person to expand on what they said in their email. I would if they were local, I would find a coffee shop. If they weren't, we'd try to Skype or whatever would work best and say, hey, you got an interesting story here. Please fill out your story. And if your story includes a journey with Jordan Peterson, describe what it was about what he said that especially hit you in such a way that you knew you needed to take a step of some kind. And so filling out, expanding the desire, the impulse that led to the conversation. And then going back to your alignment word, when someone is in that place of religious spiritual searching, there will be things said that will line up in some way with something in the scriptures. That's inevitable. And probably there will be something in what touched them in Jordan Peterson's writings or talking that also in some way lines up with something in the scripture. So I would get kind of a four-sided conversation going between the person, myself, what they heard in Peterson and what I hear in the scriptures and try to connect the dots. But my own MO is to be very slow, very gradual, to flesh out each of the dots as much as possible first so that some form of trust imbues these four dots so that there's a foundation to gradually deepen the discussion and connect the dots in deeper ways. That's really helpful. See, this is why you're the leader of the team. Now another question that I get often, and this is harder for me, is that they'll write me from someplace in the US and Canada or sometimes someplace in the world. And they'll say, you know, one of the things that I need help because, you know, obviously, I mean, I can do this with some people, but each of us only has a limited number. And so then what I try to do is I try to find someone who's preferably local, again, because face-to-face is far better than Skype, where you can hopefully establish a relationship where there can be some kind of repetitive rhythm. Because for human beings, that's really foundational. And I'm sure in your faith formation, it's not, boom, here's one thing. We have to talk about formation involves routine and rituals and healthy habits, so on and so forth. And so then the natural thing for me is to say, is there a church? Now, I think you and I both know when we once we mentioned church, we open up a field, which is people say, oh, I love diversity. Well, when it comes to the church, we got diversity because there are churches of unimaginable varieties and near infinite idiosyncrasies in the world. And so someone writes me from some obscure, I just listed, I got a letter from a guy from Italy, and he's trying to sort this out. It's like, oh, boy, Italy, no Christian Reformed churches in Italy. I almost always start with a Christian Reformed church because that gives me a baseline. There's some things I can assume about Christian Reformed pastors that I have a lot of confidence in because this is my tribe and we know our people. But very quickly, that gets complicated because they've got all of their internal stuff. They've got their story. They've already been sufficiently formed. And churches are these communities that themselves are deeply formed. And so what, what, probably another question I get asked repeatedly is, how do I go about looking for a church or a pastor or a person that can help me on my next steps to? And again, people aren't saying, you know, I want to be a committed Christian. They're they're exploring. OK, and and I I'm on the same page as you. When people come to me, I'm not going to corral you into anything. I want to explore with you. OK, it's not my job to take over your project. It's my job to assist you in your project. So with that whole church question or finding a mentor, how would you respond to that question? I think generally I would first try the mentor route before the church route. It's basically one significant insight of our time is the deeply relational character of spiritual companionship. And ideally, that spiritual companionship happens in church communities. And if you've been part of one for a significant amount of time, it's much easier to find it. But but to walk into a church for the first time as someone who's been in church for a long time, someone very unsure of one's beliefs and and not understanding how worship services are structured and why A follows B and C and so on that we all know stories of where that has been powerfully used by the spirit to to call people to call people to the Lord. But as a rule, I. I would try to begin with a one on one mentoring relationship of some kind. And I. I think I might even like you, I would say, who do I know in that person's area that that I could at least contact and say, here's a story. Is there someone in your community that you're aware of that would be willing to have coffee with this person? But yeah, Italy, that presents unique challenges. And then I would hope and pray that some kind of one on one relationship would eventually lead to a church connection. I getting back to the previous point about the four dots and connecting them. I think providing a safe place where where the initial desire can be fleshed out in more detail and become a comprehensive life story requires a one on one relationship of some kind. To the point where I would even sometimes say that if I was absolutely incapable of finding someone in the proximity of the person, that I think I might suggest an initial Skype conversation of some kind, because digital relationships with what we can do now, I think you and I are four time zones apart and 4000 miles apart. But I feel like I'm sitting in your office. So I would begin with some form of a one on one relationship. And that's one of the challenges, even though my little ripple I've made in the Jordan Peterson pond is small. I mean, even someone like me who, obviously, because I have a YouTube channel and, you know, 7500 some odd subscribers. I mean, I even I get quickly overwhelmed in terms of the number of people that I can disciple or meet. And so I, you know, right away I saw with this, I saw I'm happy I'm a denominational pastor because I do have a network and I do have friends. And there are people I can call sometimes. But the world is a very big place and it's full of people. I'd say the third question I get, because now I've been doing this for a number of months and patterns begin to emerge. Another question I get, and again, I've been answering these questions, but it's really helpful for me to hear your answers, because I feel that now you've you know enough, Jordan Peterson, and you're an expert in faith formation that this is your expertise. I can really learn from another. Another challenge I get from people is, OK, so I want so OK, so I'm listening to Jordan Peterson's biblical series, and I'm I'm really interested in the Bible. But it's one thing to listen to a YouTube and hear Jordan Peterson talk about the Bible. And that's fascinating me and all of his rambling ways. But when I sit down with this book, you know, oh, my goodness, it's huge and it's strange. And how can I kind of start with that? Do you have any suggestions or recommendations for people on that score? Well, I think this brings us back to your previous point. Why do we think of the Ethiopian eunuch, right? And the spirit saying to Philip, this is also in the Book of Acts in the early days of the church, where a visitor to Jerusalem was going home and he was reading some verses from the Book of Isaiah and the Old Testament. And was utterly baffled, confused, didn't know what to do with them. And a Christian teacher was nearby and heard a voice inside him say, go and talk to that guy, he needs your help. And so he joins him in his chariot, he baptizes him a little bit later. But it's the same principle. We need mentors, disciples to walk with us. And if I can piggyback on my earlier comment about Billy Graham, just like in the Billy Graham organization and other evangelistic organizations, they have many, many people available to do follow-up work. I wonder if a new role in the Christian church today might be something called digital disciples. Where we're recognizing that there are new ways in which the gospel or the pre-gospel, and I think I would call Peterson's pre-gospel, preparing the soil for the gospel, that there are fresh ways in which these words are getting out. And now we need fresh ways of building on what this work is doing. And so imagine, I don't know, I'm picking it up now, but imagine if in Faith, Information, and Ministries, we developed a bit of a guideline for how congregations might cultivate a team of digital disciples. And then we had a way of linking those who are seeking through digital means support of some kind, whether it's that there can be digital one-on-one Bible studies. And just like we've got other models, right, the crossroads ministry model where individuals mentor people in prison. So there's probably fresh kinds of ministries we need to develop for our current context. Well, hearing you, if in your little team you bring this up, and maybe you should talk to Back to God Ministries or someone, because I've got a whole list of people who I think would love this, and I can't do all of them. I mean, I've got a congregation. Part of me has a burden to keep doing the YouTubes that I have been doing, because those are clearly getting a response and people are engaging in the conversation. And so, you know, one of the things I would love to see if, and my bias, obviously, when someone comes to me and they say, I'm looking for a church or someone to mentor me, I go right to the CRC yearbook and I look, how close are you to a Christian-informed church? I look at the pastor's name. Do I know this pastor? Can I call in a favor? But if we had, in my opinion, it's too early to tell. But what I'm seeing is that there is a significant enough number of people who are having questions and a desire for conversations raised by this Jordan Peterson phenomenon to warrant, you know, we're a smallish denomination to say, you know, who out there is reading his book is, and I know there are other pastors, I mean, you, some are talking to me, some are talking to you, that are curious about this. Would you be willing to even just have one digital relationship with one person who, and it might only involve one session because people are flaky. And Jordan Peterson, you know, my wife, I try to explain all this to my wife and she's like, well, basement dwellers? Yeah, some of them are. And some of them are top step of the basement. You know, they're almost out. And if you go to an event, you'll see many are not in the basement. They have jobs and relationships and they're doing well. But one of the conversations that I've had with a number of people, both Christian and non-Christian, is the question of how can we support people who are sorting their lives out? And part of the disaster of our contemporary cultural situation is that many people are disconnected. And many, many people from a Christian perspective don't actually know a living, breathing Christian that they could possibly respect. And so, you know, I wonder if, and you know, I'm just little Paul VanderKlaan in Sacramento, California, with a tiny little church, you know, talking into a computer doing YouTube. But I would love it if we as a denomination had at least some people could contact me and say, I'd be willing to disciple someone. And even for a pastor, I think this would be an amazing experience because as you well know, if you're discipling someone or mentoring someone or whatever word you want to use for that relationship, the person who's doing the mentoring often learns at least as much as the person who's receiving. Because that's just the nature of it, the way it goes. So, you know, when you go back and you talk to your team, say, Paul VanderKlaan's got an idea about something. And I'm going to post this on the CRC Pastors Facebook group. And maybe I'll get some CRC Pastors that say, yeah, I'd be willing if you got someone near me, you know, send them to me. So that would that would that would greatly help me. Another way, another dimension to this is one thing we're learning at Great Formation Ministries is that there was a very large group of Christian Reformed folk who are aged 65 and older, who have a lot of kingdom service in them and aren't always exactly sure how to focus their desire for kingdom service. And I can imagine in that group, and I'm not this doesn't feel hyperbolic to me, a thousand people who would be open to being coached as digital disciples and then engaging in some of these conversations that we've talked about. These are folks who have strong biblical literacy. They've they've grown a great deal in their own walk with the Lord during the course of their lifetime. They have a lot to give and often not enough places to share their gifts. You know, Sid, that vision that you just gave me just brings me to tears because I know I know the people you're talking about because we they're all over the place in the Christian Reformed Church. They're not necessarily valued because of our cultural bias. We look at them and say, you know, they're older. What do they know? And I say, what these people are, you know, I look at it and say these people are wealth of of so much wisdom. And they're only going to be with us for another 10, 15, 20 years, maybe. How are we not passing that wisdom down to another generation? And many of the people that we're talking about who are who are struggling, you know, a lot of what they could use would be a parent or grandparent type figure that could just give them wisdom. What one person like in Jordan Peterson to, you know, and kind of a cultural uncle now who's who's just giving wisdom to a generation that has been fed so much bad advice. And so he's come now he's got some credentials and he's a clinical psychologist and all of that. But that's I mean, when you read 12 Rules for Life, it's like so much of it. We read it and say, this is the kind of stuff you learned, you know, not set aside the religious stuff. This is just how to live. Right. Right. Which is how he describes it himself, too. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Your comment about parents and grandparents reminds me last month, I was at the annual gathering of the denomination, the Synod in Grand Rapids. And in a meeting, I was in a church planter from Arizona gave this lament. He says, I've got a church filled with young children and and single parents who have no back on the faith. And we have no grandparents in my church. We badly need grandparents. And I remember all of us in the room looked and our hearts went out to this this beautiful pastor. And I just think now, well, maybe there's a way of providing digital grandparents. I just wonder at all the potential that we have here to form relationships in new ways with folks who are seeking and needing different kinds of stability in their lives. And so many older folks are really longing for ways to share their life stories and to have meaningful interactions with others of different generations. Yeah. Oh, that's that's a beautiful vision, Sid. If we if we as a denomination could facilitate something like this. And I think you're exactly right. I don't think it would be that hard. But, you know, and so then we look at these situations like you're talking about my friend Rod in Tucson and I'll name him. I'm Doc's Rod. Rod in Tucson and, you know, me in Sacramento, I've got this list of people and it's like, I who who can I who can I get to help me with? Because I can't help all of these people. And I would so love to. And it breaks my heart that the church at this point seems ill equipped or unable. And so if we could, you know, take better steps in that regard, you know, that would be that would be wonderful. Now, we've focused on a lot of the practical things. So I'd like to kind of have a little free flowing conversation. Now, what kinds of so when you read Peterson, what kinds of wonderings? What I mean, what how does so we've kind of seen kind of the practical application of them. What kinds of things is he forcing you to grow in or to think about or some of his ideas that are challenging you? Well, I. I'm really moved by his ability to name things clearly and like like he he said in one interview that every page of rules for life went through 15 drafts like he for him getting every word right. And what what that discipline has done for him, he he has learned skills in. In naming the emperor's clothing in places that were like it like a big part of his project is to unmask ideologies that that he feels lead to death. And the way he both unmasks and then rebuilds. I find really helpful. We're we're in a weird cultural moment where it feels like you either have to be on the extreme left or the extreme right. And there's no in between and there's no way to have a significant calm conversation between those extremes. And there's no in between and there's no way to have a significant calm conversation between those extremes. And what I like, I don't feel the need to agree with him and just a little little footnote here. I've gone to higher ed written reform circles and and I was trained to criticize everything that didn't fit with my own reformed principles. So I was trained to wear a very strong discernment hat all the time. And I would give myself this caution and others as well. If our primary goal is to point out what he's saying that we disagree with. I think we're really missing an opportunity. There's plenty to disagree with. But his contribution is, as I said earlier, a fresh door into looking at Jesus and the Christian Christian life. And if we can approach him through that lens, I think we can benefit a great deal. Anyway, dialing back to your original question. Well, I have two sons who are who are both seekers in terms of both millennial seekers. And we had a vacation family vacation last week and I didn't know this. I discovered that both of them are listening to Peterson. And my heart leapt. I thought, well, great. As a matter of fact, one of them sat me down and said, here's an interview he did with Joe Rogan. I want you to hear it. Here's a two and a half hour interview. And that that said to me that there's he's he's striking a kind of a nerve in our in a cultural moment. That overall as a church and I'll speak for myself as a as leader in the church I slash we are not striking in the same way. And I feel like I need to learn from to say what's this man doing that fits with the way God leads in our lives and how can I become a stronger Christian leader by by learning how the Lord is using him. Well, that you just perfectly articulated by my mission. I saw a number of things when this got going. But the thing that struck me was that I was a Christian leader. I saw a number of things when this got going. But the thing that struck me was here's this guy selling out this theater for money in Toronto. And he's he's not trained in the Bible. He's working through this day. He's thinking out loud. Right. People are flying in from all over the world to hear him do it. He's getting hundreds of thousands, if not millions of views on YouTube. Yeah. And how many churches. Don't I know that have empty seats. Right. How many Young people don't I know I have one of the things that I started doing is I have a meetup a Jordan Peterson meetup that meets here at Living Stones and we had our 10th meeting last night and People have a variety of backgrounds in that meetup. But, you know, one of the individuals said, you know, I grew up in church and I heard this thing they called the gospel. And I had no respect for it. It didn't, you know, didn't. It just seemed wrong. And so I left all that and I started listening to Jordan Peterson and Well, I, I'm pretty sure what I heard in the church wasn't right. I know that, but I'm starting to look for what is what what was Jesus saying and how can I fit that into my world. And I hear that. And I think, okay, so you have this you have this Canadian professor of psychology out of University of Toronto that made a name for kvetching about pronouns and And and this is what's getting you to rethink Christianity. I'll take it. And I should learn from him. Yes, me too. Yeah. So, so do you have any questions or I mean, I want to give you a chance to Well, I'm fairly new to listening slash reading Jordan Peterson's work. It's interesting. At one point he says he doesn't go to church. But he does believe it's good. That there are places where people gather regularly to reflect on their life trajectory. And be encouraged to continue Growing slash developing as a as a human being. I mentioned that because he focuses very much on the individual. And partly because he sees that group identities on the right and on the left. Have morphed into ideologies that are not life giving And of course he's a he's an Alberta cowboy by by upbringing. So he has a little bit of that. Long range or individualistic spirit in him. But at the same time, the theme that he says over and over and over again is If you want to benefit someone else's life, get your own house in order that there's a symbiotic relationship between personal responsibility and corporate benefit. And so I'm curious to see as his own thinking develops, which is continually doing if if you are more intentionally at a corporate dimension. To to his thinking, which, which, of course, because currently it's so Individual centered which he believes is important because individual responsibility is key to his worldview. But I wonder if you'll come to see that But we need a community in order to really sustain the journey that he suggests we take It reminds me of David Brooks, who two years ago published that wonderful book about character. And as soon as it was done said I go with one huge admission here. I forgot about the role of community. And that's going to be my next book. And again, David Brooks is also a kind of a pre evangelist kind of writer in our culture. Yeah, yeah. Some parallels there, I think. You will you you've just So we have this meetup. And this is a point I keep making at the meetup. I keep making on my videos. And when you said Billy Graham, I don't know if you've watched any of my videos just watch Peterson's videos for you don't have to watch my videos, but my videos are thinking out loud, but You know my I was very much tracking with you because as a pastor, I know you can preach an amazing sermon and someone can be brought to tears in your church and they'll come up after and they'll say pastor that sermon changed my life. And but I as a pastor know If if you don't have a structure. In which to build this into your life. If there isn't a container if if there isn't a group. If there isn't a community. This is why we talk about this is why the church is so important in terms of Christ formation because a psychologist should know we are formed by our context. Yeah. So if we say I want to become that kind of person over there. The question. This is a Dallas Willard thing, of course, the question is not intent. Well, I intend to be that person. The real question you have to ask is what do I need to do every day to become that person. Yeah. And as human beings, there's a world of things forming us around us all the time from the media from the culture, mostly the people we're living with. These are the things forming us. And so if you say I want to be that kind of person. You should say, okay, what do I think what do I need to do every day every week every month. Who do I need to surround myself with. If I want to become that I need a plan to become that I can't just try. And and so when I listen to Jordan Peterson and I've talked a lot about this in my videos. He I like it. I use the difference between I got called on this last night because someone said you keep talking about Jordan Peterson is John the Baptist. I use the difference between I got called on this last night because someone said you keep talking about Jordan Peterson is John the Baptist. Most people you are talking to don't know who that is. Okay. But the difference between John the Baptist and Jesus in many ways, John the Baptist made a big splash. Sorry for the pun that was on. John the Baptist made a big splash. And in fact, he made a big splash that lasted a couple of centuries. Yeah. But what happened with the Jesus movement is that communities formed And those communities formed Christ in the people and and well it's funny you use the word Christ because as you and I know, but probably almost nobody who's listening to this video knows Christ is actually a collective. It's you know Jesus office. But when you listen to the Apostle Paul that this crazy term that he uses in Christ. What do you mean by in Christ, you know, we could look at loose meets book on that, which is a tremendous book, but in Christ. Well, that's formation. And so I I'm completely in agreement and I've actually I've asked him this question myself. People who have listened to me have asked him that asked him this question. And he seems to he's a clinical psychologist. He's used to dealing with people one on one. But I think a blind side, which is ironic, given the fact that he's talking about a lot of formation and context with respect to the culture war a blind side in terms of his mission is Unlike Billy Graham, who had this organization behind him. Billy Graham understood what it takes to form people and sustain something Peterson is just kind of out there doing but there's nothing coming behind him. Right. And I wonder if part of the dynamic is As he describes his own life journey. He's clearly an extra ordinarily self disciplined person. That the way he structures his life is incredibly strong. But most of I'm not that way. I need a community around me that holds me accountable that nudges me forward that reminds me of commitments. I've let slip. And and so maybe that's part of his blind spot is that he's so so unusually gifted in disciplines and the Christian life is being discipled as being disciplined right Embodying practices and I love the way, for example, he says, look, if you're going to set a goal for yourself, make it incremental. So every week, just add a little bit more to it. And to me that fits so much with What we in the reform tribe call sanctification. It's, it's bit by bit, step by step, keeping in step with the Holy Spirit. But I do think there's a blind spot there in terms of the individual in the community, the way he approaches things. Well, any any last things you want to say you've got, you know, a few thousand people will watch this video probably any any last comments I really appreciate and don't hang up after I kind of close this part because we can talk after I Stop recording, but you know I I am so grateful to hear you today, said, because I you're very much, you know, I hear your thoughts, you know, my thoughts coming out of your mouth on so much of this and you know they were both Christian reform pastors and we've been formed by the same tribe. And for a lot of people out there who just watch me and know very little about the church. They look at me like, well, you're, you're an anomaly, Paul, because you're, you're a strange pastor, you're not like the other pastors. I know, but I want to say. At least, you know, if I, if we can tout our own tribe that there are many others like us in the Christian reform church and the broader church as well. And that it is not the case that pastors are simplistic ideologues that know three things and just annoy people by repeating them all the time and don't actually know how to know and love people. That is a, that is a Cliche. So I'm, I'm deeply appreciative for what you said. And, you know, I'm, I'm hoping that this conversation can not only help the people that watch my channel, but also help you know the Christian reform church and thinking about As a pastor of a small church and a church that is struggling like the Christian reform church. I look at this and say, Here is a world full of people who want to have meaningful conversations. They might not be saying, well, I want to become a Christian and I want to join your church and I want to give you money. And they're not saying that they're saying, I want to have a meaningful conversation. And one of the things that I've noted in my meetup. So my meetups, I don't open with prayer, we just house them in the church. Everybody knows I'm a pastor, but so many of the people that come to my meetup say This is like the only place I can go and just tell my truth about God and thinking and existence and morality. I can just tell my truth with a bunch of other people. And just work on it together. And when I'm in that space. I think this is what one thing I would always have loved the church to facilitate What I never could pull it off until this crazy Jordan Peterson thing started happening. And now suddenly I've got so much in my lap. I can't handle it. So I, you know, this conversation for me has been, you know, it's been cold water to a parched throat. So I'm deeply appreciative of this that I really am. Well, it's mutual. And just to piggyback on your comment about the Peterson meetup. A little factoid that has really moved me. It's that a couple years ago, the Fuller Youth Institute, a few hours south of you there in Pasadena, interviewed 500 high school graduates and asked them, What do you wish your church had done more of as you grew up. And their number one response was we wish there were more opportunities for deep conversations. And I think we're in a cultural moment where there's a profound hunger for deep conversations, just like the ones you described you were at last night and Peterson is helping to build capacity for those conversations as well. Well, I How are you Yeah, I, you know, to me, you know, because in my group there there are atheists there are there are people from just about any background and they wander in and they've got their own take but Here we can talk. And I think I think about Paul in was it was it. I don't remember. It's Corinth or Ephesus where he basically have this Have this lecture hall that he, you know, anyone would come and to me, I think we've got churches with facilities all over the world. Yeah. Why aren't we doing this. Well, I think, I think many like myself have hungered for it, but it wasn't until well we're going to talk about Jordan Peterson and And for me as a pastor, obviously, just like you, I listened to Jordan Peterson, there's alignment with Jesus and oh so you want to come and talk to me about the big things of your life. That's, that's my job. So Well, thank you. Thank you so much, said and again any any final things you want to say or tell me before I stop the recording. No, I was delighted to converse with you and I defined a kindred spirit in terms of how we engage the world and and Jordan Peterson to thank you. Well, thank you.