https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=n5obe0yyb7o

 Hi, this is Paul. Earlier when I made the video this week, my commentary video on Tom Holland's conversation with Glenn Scrivner, I commented that I'd been watching this video that day. Now that's a few days ago, and I usually like to make these videos as close as possible to watching the conversation. This video I'm talking about is Bret and Heather 50th Dark Horse Podcast live stream being shocked and live not by lies about a commentary on reading a thing by Barry Weiss to the Jewish community and then they read Rod Rear. That blew me away. Now a number of people emailed me, sent me Twitter messages saying, are you keeping up with these two? They're talking about what you've been talking about. Okay, the code we live by is what I put on the slide here on the PowerPoint because I've been talking a lot about the, gosh, it's just so hard to talk about because it's so close to us that we don't recognize it. This is the common stuff that we, it's the code that we live by, and I don't mean that in the sense of the colloquial phrase, it's how we are all programmed to look at the world. And I know I've been harping on this point that we like to imagine we see the world directly, and I use the illustration of this camera. Does this camera see the world? No, it doesn't. Well, you say, well, it's not plugged in. If I plug in this camera, does it see the world? And integral, especially to Jordan Peterson's conversations with Sam Harris, you know, I thought the most fruitful of those conversations was the first one in Vancouver. The point that Jordan Peterson was making is the camera doesn't see anything. It's all the stuff that goes into, it's all the stuff that, you know, the camera doesn't see. Thousands of thousands and thousands of years of development has put into human beings that allows us to see. Jesus has this great phrase, ears to hear and eyes to see. We can have eyes, but we don't necessarily see. A corpse has eyes, but a corpse doesn't see. What are we talking about? Well, we, in order to process this world, we live in a world of code, and that code, I'm using a computer analogy. We're always using the cutting edge of our technology for our best analogies, and they all fall short. But we need this code in which to see what's going on around us. And I talked about religion S and religion W. Religion S as in the secularist perspective of religion, which has supernatural things and gods and all of these items, whereas religion W, which is worldview, that's the code we see the world through. Now I wanted to make a few comments about Brett and Heather, just to be clear on my opinion of them. I've never met them in person. I've listened to them a decent amount. I haven't listened to every episode. Obviously, I've heard, listened to more of Brett, and both been impressed by a lot of what he's done and sometimes a little shocked by certain blind spots that I believe there are in his perspective. Heather, I know less about, but I remember listening to an interview that she did on Rebel Wisdom and was really impressed by her comments. And Brett often states that Heather was the most popular professor at Evergreen State, and from everything that I've seen, I totally believe it. She's personable, she's authentic. And to be quite honest, when I look at these two, these are exactly the kind of people I would have, my mic, I've got to get a new stand for this mic. These are exactly the kind of people I would have in my friend group through many portions of my life. Particularly when I was living overseas. One of the things that happens when you live overseas, especially if you settle into a small area, not a capital city, is one of the groups of people you often begin to bond with, as I did in the little town I lived in in the Dominican Republic, was a tiny little group of expatriates who were living there. Many of them were not all religious habitat co-workers, an English couple who were working on a tiny little project that was trying to make life better in another tiny little community outside of the small city I was living in. Another couple was there, he was working on a shrimp farm. So when I listen to Brett and Heather, I think these are my people. These are people who care about the world first, worry about money and livelihood second. That came through in Brett's conversation with Eric on the portal, which I found to be just absolutely interesting and delightful. I know there's a fair amount of cynicism out there about Big Brother Eric's assertion that Brett should have won the Nobel Prize, and I'm not in a position to judge that one way or another. I just look at it through the lens of, these are brothers who love each other, and Big Brother is looking out for Little Brother, and Big Brother basically says, you should be more mercenary in looking out for your own self-interest, and Little Brother is more like, hey, if I want to spend my life giving it in service to people at a small college in Washington state, and he's not expecting heaven for this, he's just doing it because he wants to make the world better. And both of them are this way. And again, when I look at these people, the little I know about their lives, they to me are like how many people I know and love and respect who, whether or not they're religious S, religious in terms of a secular's perspective, we keep using that, religious S versus religious W, whether or not they're religious S, they're here for the betterment of the world and they're going to give themselves sacrificially for it. And when I look at their podcast and what they're trying to do with it, and Brett's, I think it's a little quixotic, Unity 2020, ambitious, yes, maybe you think 2024, but hey, whatever you think of that politically, I think, man, yes, the world would be better if there'd be more people like you, absolutely, because these two are in many ways the salt of the earth from everything that I can tell about them through this narrow little YouTube filter. Now, some of you might say, well, that's coming from Paul. Who does Paul not like? And OK, fair enough. I'm a happy guy. I tend to like people and I like looking at the best in people. But I've got a world of respect for these two. I really do. And like I said, if given their education, I mean, they're roughly my age. They are they are exactly the kinds of people that I've spent much of my life being friends with that until Jordan Peterson came along and all these kinds of people now look at me and they're like, Paul, I'm a little worried about you at Jordan Peterson thing that I'm concerned where that took you. Well, let's let's get into that a little bit. Yeah, the slide is basically what I just said. How different are these people from me, even though Brett gets a little itchy when he, you know, when you say the word supernatural, he gets a little it seems it just kind of reacts to that. But they're well educated. They're politically progressive. They're not chasers of money or fame. They're wanting to make a difference. They've got extensive overseas experiences. You know, when they tell in this video the story about this ride in a in a bus in Madagascar, I think about experiences that I've had in the developing world. And yeah, and it just it just warms my heart. They don't believe in God or go to church. And so, you know, many people I've known as a pastor, does it really that much of a difference? And again, I really want to be fair to this question because pastors are always telling people in their church, your Christianity doesn't make enough difference in your life. Well, that's true, because in so many ways, I'm not a lot different from these two. There are my religious beliefs and positions. And, you know, Brett might think that I'm, you know, a little soft headed for that or whatever he thinks of my religious positions. But he's obviously someone that can live closely with other religious people and in mutual relationships of respect. And so, yeah. And just today, someone drew to my attention on Twitter this Nassim Tlaib post on Change Theology and Mamed. That's what I said it was about. Religious religion, violence, tolerance and progress, religion S. Nothing to do with theology. And Nassim Tlaib, who grew up in a. You know, in a very violent corner of the world at a very time, violent time in the world, you know, has a lot of credibility making a point like this. I mean, where the Lebanese Civil War was, Lebanon was astoundingly diverse and obviously for a time considered to be, you know, the Paris of the Levant. But then, of course, devolved into this horrid civil war. And he makes the point knowing, you know, a variety of religious traditions in that area of the world close up and personal that the theology didn't seem to necessarily be the divisions of this religious S people like to relate everything to their theology. And they imagine that their life flows from their distinctive religious S commitments. And he kind of says, not so much, not so fast. Observation seldom validates this assertion. And you find that people who on one level have very common. So much religious commonality in the whole. Oh, gosh, in a place like the Christian Reformed Church. It's hard to. It's it's hard to stress how fierce this battle is. I'm looking for my Christian, the book from. I mean, when Kristen De May wrote this book and you can find my conversation with her on the channel, a professor of history at Calvin College, she's signaling within the the the the little the little culture war within the CRC saying, you know, hey, you know, if you're of a vote for Trump is a vote against Jesus and you've got people on the other side and theologically. You know, they look pretty darn close, at least for now. And that gets into this question. I mean, to what degree is theology just a chattering rider? To what degree is theology sort of a trailing indicator? And that's part of what I've that's part of what I suspect as I watch. People in the CRC sort of because what's happening in the CRC is sort of the mainline evangelical, the tectonic plates are moving away from each other and their basic understanding, their their understanding and assumptions of the code of the gospel are changing and the change happens quite slowly and theology tends to live in books. And so that changes even more slowly. So to Leib's point is crucial here. But part of what we have is the representational hierarchy challenge, where, as I was mentioning to an individual today, we have this whole and I'll probably post that conversation I had soon on the channel. We have this whole vast, huge, huge world. And we simply have to represent it verbally, mentally in various ways in order to deal with it. But almost all these representations fall short at some time. So you can find here Christians battling feverishly in this election year over, you know, how much of an antichrist are you either to vote for Trump or Biden? And, you know, these are all internal internal fights. And so and part of what we're seeing in the rise of the IDW and in Bret and Heather's journey themselves and in some ways in my own journey in the CRC is OK. I wouldn't say that theology is incidental or disconnected. I just say that it's very much a lagging indicator. Theology sort of has to keep up. And there's always so much theology that's sort of sitting in the past inactive. Let's say that's the genetics that hasn't been activated by the epigenetics, that it's just sort of out there. And this is, you know, so when I listen to Bret and Heather, I think, you know, we share a product of our times. You know, I grew up in in Patterson in a racial reconciliation church and I mean, the church was mostly black, but I went to the because of, you know, my Dutch Calvinist tradition, I went to the Christian Reformed day school, which was mostly white and Dutch. But obviously, deep parts of me were shaped by the American civil rights movement. That was the that was the cutting edge of what was going on in my father and my mother's lives and in our church in the 60s and 70s in Patterson, New Jersey. And if you want to get a sense of Patterson, New Jersey, listen to Bob Dylan's song Hurricane Patterson and that area in the surrounding New York City was very racially segregated in terms of little ghettoed communities. And so, you know, the Jews in Fairlawn and the blacks in Patterson and the Italians and Haldane and North Haldane and Fairlawn and, you know, St. Paul's church and school were just up the road. And for a while in the 20th century, Prospect Park, New Jersey was Dutch Hill. It was 90 percent Dutch and a good percentage CRC Prospect Park recently had an Islamic mayor and a lot of Islamic immigrants have moved into Patterson. And when I listen to, you know, people who are still living there, I mean, Patterson has simply been the landing place for wave after wave of immigrants. In fact, the 9-11 immigrants, the 9-11 immigrants, the 9-11 terrorists were staying just a couple of blocks from the house I grew up in because that was a community that they could come into and just fit in right there in the neighborhood I grew up in. But that wasn't the same neighborhood as in the 60s and 70s. And so, you know, I look at Bretton Heather and very much globalist, cosmopolitan. That's my background. And in the CRC, within its spectrum and framework, I was a very reliable progressive. You know, greater justice and diversity on racial matters. You can find writings that I've done for the denomination prominent for women in church office, much more of a compassionate accommodation perspective for gays and lesbians. Voted, I mean, voted twice for Barack Obama. You know, and there are sometimes in the past that some of you are going to be horrified and some of you will even unsubscribe after I'm about to say what I said. You know, I've even voted to the left of the Dems over the years. I mean, I look at Bretton Heather and it's like, I don't see that they have, in a lot of ways, at least given my circumstance, I don't think they have better liberal credentials than I do. But, of course, I have always been religiously conservative. And so, you know, I don't have any problem with any of the statements in the Apostles Creed. And so someone might look at that and say, well, how can I have plenty of people in the Christian Reformed Church ask me this? Because, of course, this was our experience growing up in Patterson, but all of my cousins who were, you know, in other places in the denomination, we were just the weird cousins who who were out of step politically with everyone else. And, of course, you know, as as progressives and and what we used to call liberals would imagine, no, we're we're the smarter, we're the ones that are further along and in good time, our our relatives in other places will catch up. And, you know, this this this was who I was. But in the early teens, I began to see theological changes. And so, you know, so on one hand, politically, socially, I was I was very much a progressive. Theologically, I was much more traditional. And so I'm sort of marching with the progressives and I begin looking at other progressives and I begin to see their theology sort of. Migrating and mutating, and it's like, hey, wait a minute. I always saw my politics as an expression of my theology, and now you're changing the theology and well, would my politics change? That's sort of where Rod Rear came in, because in the early teens, I start reading Rod Rear and I don't know who got me onto Rod Rear. But I I always sort of found him to be a bit of an alarmist, but I found him to be interesting. He's a good writer. And and sometimes he'd write pieces that were just beautiful. And and I loved his sincerity. And, you know, he's the guy that I talk about often who he and his wife were, I believe he worked. I think he worked in the George W. Bush administration. It was one of these conservatives that the the Gulf, the the Iraq War just sort of put him off to it. And he and his wife go to the Roman Catholic priest and want to talk about Catholic family planning. And the Roman Catholic priest sort of rolls his eyes and and Rear goes to orthodoxy, because at least the orthodox are serious. And I know many of you who listen to my videos are are right there with him. And so Drear was in many ways my first my introduction. To this this new wave of orthodoxy, but Drear, of course, if you've read him over the years, saw the the Supreme Court decision on same sex marriage as this was that this was the defining this was the defining moment. And I would often look at that and think, well, I don't know, really. And but this comment that was left on on a recent. So Drear, in some ways. My early vision for working with YouTube was in a sense to do something like Drear had done, but in a YouTube format, because I had been blogging before and I'd always used my blog as a way to to catalog and archive the the the interesting things I was reading. I was a voracious reader of blogs and websites and books. And I was just doing all of that. And but I wanted to cataglyph. I wanted to catalog it and I wanted to find some of the best things written out there. And I thought that'd be kind of a cool thing to do on YouTube. But then that's why I tried to figure out how I can do it with the PowerPoint here and pull up pictures and articles, because I had I'd always done that in my preaching. And I was in some ways inspired by Drear's blog and and the way that he blogs and and Andrew Sullivan as well. You know, I'd read The Dish for a number of years and really enjoyed reading Andrew Sullivan. And so, you know, to the degree that I've been red pilled, it's probably Drear and Sullivan that you have to blame, not Peterson. They had already laid the groundwork long before I found Peterson to to have me asking some theological questions about, hey, what's really going on here? And so and so then this comment on Drear's on on a. So how I got here was I went to Drear and said, OK, because he often lists the reviews and what he thinks of the reviews of books that he writes. He did this for the Benedict Option. He did this for his new book about lies and communism. And so I found a review of Drear's book that that he really liked. And so I read that review because I haven't read the book. I didn't read Benedict Option either because I had read so much Drear leading up to the Benedict Option that I thought, what am I going to learn in the book? Now, maybe that's a fault of mine. And maybe I should thank Drear for for all of his blogging by by at least buying his book. But this is a common comment from on Drear. And and I think it's a fair comment and which which made me just shocked to see Heather Hying reading Drear. And I think, do you know where this guy is coming from? So so here's a comment. It was the top comment on this blog, which was on a book review about Drear's book. As best as I can tell, without having read the book, the lie that Drear is most concerned about is that equal rights for gay people is a societal good and a moral imperative. I noted that Drear first used live not live not by lies as the title of a blog post two days after Obergefell. I never know how to say that word after the Obergefell decision. And that post Drear approvingly quotes Patrick Deenan or Deneen, the likeliness of denial of same sex marriage to racial bigotry has proven to be wildly, wildly successful tactic, but it is premised on a lie. As a Christian who is strongly in favor of equal rights for gay people, I reject the contention that denial of said rights is not bigotry. It is Drear and Deneen and all who claim otherwise are not Christians. OK, so here we have this dynamic that Tlaib is noting. And so, OK, here's this theological assertion that this individual Mark S. Eleven days ago or 12 days ago now made the theological assertion that. In his creed, at least equal rights for gay people. Equal political rights, equal church, right? Again, you can start digging into these things. Equal rights for gay people is should be a part of the Christian creedal system that if you deny this, you are not a Christian. That's what this person is saying. Obviously, Drear thinks otherwise and a great many other Christians think otherwise. But I don't think there's any question about, especially when you get to Heather Hying's comments about growing up during the AIDS crisis, you know, how Heather and Brett feel about this, which which made Drear's books appearance on their approving appearance on their podcast. All the more interesting. And then the last line in this comment, they deserve the shunning they will receive. So, hey, this is. This is that this is the culture war. This is the fight. This is what this is about, that Drear and Deneen and others like him. These things deserve to be no platform because this idea. And again, what do you mean by equal rights? Is these political rights? I mean, how this works and OK, marriage as such. I remember having a conversation with some young people who were frankly horrified early on during the California Proposition 8 thing because they weren't voters yet. And so they asked me, you know, what what do you think of this? My question is really whether marriage is really the right word to describe what happens for a I don't know. At that point, there was civil unions and apparently Pope Francis just came out saying some favorable things towards civil unions. That's going to cause a little scuffle in the Roman Catholic Church. But, you know, here we are. This is that this is this is ground center. And so I said, I'm not you know, marriage is if you understand historically, traditionally what marriage is. Well, that's really the question, isn't it? It's what is marriage? Is marriage traditionally the the institution by which property rights are handed down to legitimate heirs generation after generation? Hence the definition of the word bastard or is marriage sort of a relational pinnacle of expressive individualism where two people say declare to the world that they're besties for life? Is that what marriage is? What is marriage? I mean, it's basically the question of same sex marriage really hinges on the definition of marriage. And of course, Drear has been pretty consistent and sometimes shrill about this. So, yeah, to the degree that I've been red pilled at all, you got Drear and Andrew Sullivan to thank. So, yeah, I'm a product of my, you know, if I didn't read so much, maybe I'd stay a reliable progressive. And of course, it was through Drear that I found Jordan Peterson. And once my attention shifted to Jordan Peterson and look at the soft look at the soft focus on my laptop webcam, you know, how sharp the new the real camera is. And early on, someone someone said, Paul, let me buy you more equipment. And I said, I don't know what I'd do with it. Let me evolve naturally with respect to this thing, OK, because I might just drop it one of these days on ADHD like that. Anyway, then my attention shifted from Drear to Peterson and Peterson was hitting on so many more things than Drear was for me. And of course, you know, my deep dive into Peterson, you all know better as well as anybody. And so Drew's Benedict option always felt sort of been there done that in terms of CRC history because the CRC before the Second World War was the Benedict option. I mean, we had our own schools, we had our own churches, we were we were a people unto ourselves. And in World War Two, like many other ethnic denomination, they took down the walls and sort of like taking down the dykes in the Netherlands. The sea rushed in and now we're just like everyone else trying to figure out we could be mainline or we're going to be evangelical or we're going to be or we're going to be something other than that. So, of course, Jordan Peterson and the wave around him really grabbed my attention and I I surfed that sucker all the way until maybe we're going to see wave number two. And of course, I found Brett and Heather along the way. Some of my early commentary on Brett was from a rebel wisdom interview with him and Jamie Weill. And that's where I got the see, here's the thing about pastors. Once we get a quote, especially me, once I get a quote, I grab onto it like a Rottweiler and I don't let it go. The human beings are programmed assassin robots and they just have to transcend their programming. What? This is an evolutionary biologist who's at that point making a budding career out of sort of defining our programming and explaining our present behavior by virtue of that ancient programming. And we're just going to transcend it. That seems completely contrary to everything that you've been saying. And, of course, later on, and, you know, Peugeot, when he says to Andrea and I can't I think of his name. You know, we're pattern seeing patterns. And that's exactly right. And so probably the the the besetting sin of modernism is that they simply forget that they're human beings, that it's human beings doing science, that it's pattern seeing patterns and that you go into hours and hours and hours of explaining our behavior by virtue of our programming. And you say, oh, we can transcend it. It's like, really? Really? That's that everything else you're saying doesn't make that one thing make any sense. So so let's talk about how people are. And again, I've I've learned a lot of this in the journey here. Yeah, our mimetic programming is deep. And on one hand, you know, you talk about evolutionary programming and all of that. But what about the the mimetic programming and the culture net? And in my sermon last week and more and more, you've heard me talk about the fact that right from the start, from a very even before we are born, we are being programmed by the world around us and and programmed mimetically in that we are. Imitating and repeating and, you know, René Girard, we're even getting our desires from each other and and we do it by sight. And I made this point again to in a conversation I made today that. You don't even realize that you are being programmed when you're young, you just do it. And it's we're on autopilot when it comes to that and you begin to realize it when you bump up against other programming. You don't know what it's like to be in a marriage until you are married and you look across the bed or the kitchen table to someone else and you discover. They had different programming and then you have a child and and you might have done some self reflection, perhaps on the complaints you had about your parents, only to realize that once you're in the father role, well, you're still working off your rough draft. And I mentioned to this individual he was the youngest of he was the second youngest of seven, number six of seven, and they had homeschooled and they were conservative Christians, etc, etc. When you're at the tail end of a big family like that, your parents began child number one with some degree of edits on their first draft. And then they kept updating their draft as as they were getting feedback from their children. And so we're we're constantly reprogramming, reprogramming, reprogramming. That's the code. This is happening all the time. And we're doing this culturally. And now with media, we're doing it globally. And we're doing it all the time. And this is why in my sermon last week on on the Fifth Commandment, honor your father and your mother. Our parents are godlike. They not only give us their their genetic material, but if they raise us, they give us their their they give us our first draft of just about everything in the world. But but even once they give us that first draft over time, we're we're we're altering it and and retooling it by our temperament and by our experience. And and that's why even this individual, I look at my own children, I have five children, each of them are they're all different. And it's it's really amazing. They've got the same two parents. They've got they were raised by the same parents, but they're all distinct individuals. Yet there's commonality. And again, the. The complexity of this, if I were to lock you in a cell and say, I will let you I will only let you out when you when you have produced ten thousand true observations about you as a romantic partner or you as a parent, you could probably generate ten thousand. And they would probably only half be true. And that would be only the beginning, because you have been encoded. You have been encoding so much information. That you can't even the little consciousness, the member of your consciousness, Congress that is moving your lips. This person doesn't have time to articulate it. And and all of the rest of that consciousness, Congress is back there. And the amazing thing about us is that we're constantly processing this processing this stuff. And this, again, is why Jordan Peterson's work was so helpful in his articulation is that this is what comes out of us. And Brett knows that. I mean, Brett's second track, you know, the immaterial relation of what I call culture net. We've all inherited this first draft and we live in this world and we hardly know we've got it until we bump into another culture. That might be a romantic partner. That might be someone from a very different culture or a different family or or the church that your rivals with the theology that is almost an exact duplicate, but just a little different. And now suddenly bang, they're the greatest enemy. You know, it's the old it's the old joke about finding the Dutchman on a desert island and he gets there and they realize, well, there's three buildings. He says, yeah, there's my house, there's my church and there's the church I used to go to. That's how schismatic the Dutch reformed are. And so we say that joke when we laugh about ourselves. But there it is. And I know there's variants of that joke for many, many other communities. But this mimetic programming, you know, there's there's a picture. This is this is a picture of my youngest and at a church function. And, you know, those little my heart just beats when I see that picture of my son. But, you know, those little eyes, those beautiful little eyes and that little brain are just absorbing, absorbing, absorbing, absorbing, absorbing. We're just sponges and we take this stuff in and we don't even know that we're doing it until far later in life. We do something and then someone says, why did you do that? What do you mean? Why did I do that? That's the way it's done. Well, that might be the way you do it, but that's not the right way. And then we see it in ourselves and then we do something. So why did I do that? Why did I do that? Well, I guess I got that from and then you begin to dig down. I mean, that's Tom Holland's story. You begin to dig down and you discover. You can just dig and dig and dig and dig again. This is how we're programmed. Jordan Peterson, it was good to listen to Susan Blackmore in that whole conversation, because Jordan Peterson's talking about his dominance hierarchy and was the. Bucko's he's kept some of his inflation here. It's not just dominance, it's its its status in so many different ways. And the amazing thing about human beings is that, you know, so let's say unlike wolves that sort of have one dominance hierarchy, we have, you know, seemingly limitless higher status hierarchies that we're using to cooperate and compete and to. And then when we see and we model and we mimic and then because especially if we see something, we see opportunities and threats, we see something do someone do something and and it seems to turn out well for them. So then we do it. So then we try it. Or then maybe we were doing it like them, but now we're going to get caught mimicking. So now we're going to do it like them. We're going to do it a little bit different. We'll try and do it a little better. So we're going to get a leg up and, you know, women peel off the top and all the Jordan Peterson stuff. It's all in there. And so we're not only repeaters, but we're repeaters to get ahead. And and as you know, René Girard comes in and says, well, to get ahead in what to get ahead in what we desire. Well, we desire what the other one has. And, you know, we might not even know if it's good. But, you know, if if if that guy, if that guy wants it, it sure must be good. They see this all the time. And again, once you once you begin to learn these things and you begin to watch for them, it's like, oh, man, they're all over the place. Some of that, I'm sure, is some some biases, but but other things, too. And so here's where we have the the religion S and the religion W. Your religion W describes the ways, means and ends you are pursuing implicitly, communally and perspectively. And so, you know, when I sit and listen to Bret and Heather, OK, I I have religion S and they don't. But the religion W, that's the majority of the code. So. Of course, we see the same thing. Of course, we want the same thing. And and and that's why even though in my family tradition, we deny ourselves financially, according in order to achieve other things out in the world. And we look at that theologically and say, well, that's that's Matthew six. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and all these things will be added unto you. I would say that's why we do it. We do it because Jesus says so. Why do Bret and Heather do it? Well, they kind of do it because they looked around and the kind of value and esteem and and stuff that they saw that they truly valued. They looked at people who and you can list their names. A whole bunch of them are pictured in this picture up here. I don't want to move the camera. It's one of these pictures of Jesus face. And, you know, you have Gandhi and and Richard Niebuhr and, you know, all kinds of people from the mid 20th century who did things that people are all esteemed for. And it's like, well, do you want to? You know, do you want to be Andrew Carnegie or do you want to be Gandhi? Which is it? And you say, well, I want my I want my praise. I want people to I want, you know, fame. I'm going to live forever. They're going to remember my name. You want to be remembered for making a lot of money? You want to be a Vanderbilt or you want to be a Dr. Martin Luther King, who gave his life for the liberation of of black folks in the Jim Crow South? Which do you want to be? Money's fleeting fame. I'm going to live forever. It's one way to live forever. The Greeks knew that. So then what? And Jordan Peterson says something in the midst of it. Let's see how we put the link in here. And I love the end of that video because, you know, people are always asking Jordan, do you believe in God? At the end of the video, Jordan says exactly the God he believes in. So maybe we'll cue that up. Question I'm going to ask you for both of you, which is the question we began with. We're talking about the psychology of belief. Do we need God to make sense of life? Your one minute answer begins now. Absolutely not. That will do for an answer. God to make sense of life, Jordan. Well, God is what you use to make sense of your life by definition. This is one of the things I learned from Jung. The highest value. You have a hierarchy of values. You have to. Otherwise, you can't act or you're painfully confused. You have a hierarchy of values. Whatever is at the top of that hierarchy of values serves the function of God for you. Now, it may be a God that you don't believe in or a God that you can't name, but it doesn't matter. Because it's God for you. And what you think about God has very little impact on how God is acting within you. Whatever God it is that you happen to be, let's say, following. It's been fascinating. So there's Jordan Peterson's view. And let's see if I can pull up the. I mean, not only is it not only is it religion, religion S and religion W, we'd say, well, Brett and Heather have a God and and and the God that they have by virtue of how they live their life and how they were formed by their political and irreligious community, which had huge amounts in common with Paul VanderKlaas religious and political community. Well, was their God really all that different from Paul's? So they say, well, the supernatural stuff. I mean, Paul believes in things like the second coming and the virgin birth and the resurrection. I don't believe in that stuff, but it comes right down to it. Does it really matter if you believe in the resurrection again? I mean, the conversation I just had this morning touched on this and he gave me permission to share it. So I will share it. So that's coming on the channel. I got a lot of stuff to get through the channel. I don't like posting more than things one a day. I might start using the clip channel. I haven't done much on that lately, but I might start using it for littler videos. If I can ever do something small, I keep my eye on the time. I didn't intend this to be long, but yeah, that's how it goes. Warren Warren, my friend Warren says I ramble. Can you believe it? Anyway, God is an integral factor in this. It's the thing at the top of your salience hierarchy. And you might say, well, and you might be with Sam Harris and say, well, that's not that's that's that's not what we mean by God. God is the super thing up in the sky that responds to your prayers and looks down on you. If you masturbate, of course, that's where the conversation went. And, you know, delightfully. So you had Peterson over here and Sam there and Brett in the middle saying, no, I kind of understand him. So that's not a definition that that that Brett will turn up his nose at. And in that video, Brett and Heather go into a little bit of their religious background. Heather cuts Brett off like, come on, Brett, you're rambling too much. It's fun that they're a married couple. They know each other real well. And that's another delightful thing about their videos is their relationship for each other, because it's hey, I've been married 32 years. I have an understanding about the complexity of married life. But, you know, they they they clearly love each other. They're committed to each other. And in the video, gosh, they sound like 1980s. Culture warriors, religious writers when they're talking about the families, the foundation of society, like who swapped Jerry Falwell in here? I mean, what's going on here? You know, Brett, Brett says he gets this, but sometimes he says things that I think I'm not sure how much you get this, Brett. And so I think what's beautiful about Tom Holland's work is it helps us see the code. And and Tom Holland, I think he's right. And this is that these Bible stories. If you think about, OK, if we go back to the medic programming, well, what are Bible stories? Bible stories are sort of, again, see it through the Jordan Peterson lens, it's sort of these distilled high potency. They're like multivitamins and they've been shaped and condensed and focused and and ensued. And they've been worked over time that these Bible stories get into our mimetic programming and they get into people and then they get into, you know, and they get in over years and years and years and years and culture and all kinds of levels that that basically our society was programmed by these Bible stories. And they've reshaped humanity's code at a deep level. And it's so pervasive that we don't even see the code anymore. But now as modernity, again, the point I made was, you know, really, it's the 18th century that a lot of this stuff really got into our code. And we've been working on this code from from that's almost 300 years old. And it's starting to creak and it's decaying, which is Jordan Peterson's point to Susan Blackmore. And if you haven't watched that commentary video, you know, that's what I get into. It's decaying and it's going away. And that's why all these classical liberals are are marching up to defend the West, sort of like, you know, the armies of Gondor. And Tom Holland's basically saying, well, you know, we're not really quite sure how this works. And and Brett in this video does some speculating. Well, maybe you have to maintain the practices. But without the supernatural stuff, no, no supernatural stuff. We don't want to we don't want to invoke the the super thing. Why are you so afraid of the super thing? Huh? Huh? Relax. The assumptions are now simply so pervasive, we don't even recognize their source. That's Tom Holland's big thesis. And of course, he was on stage with. I got a clip there, too. He was on stage with Alastair McGrath and Alastair McGrath has advanced degrees in both science and religion. That whole conversation on Unbelievable was so cool because, you know, Brett's just going on and he's kind of doing his thing. And Alastair, I didn't think Alastair, I don't know how much of Brett stuff Alastair knew. Brett's a busy scholar and scholars have their nose in books and they're not listening to Brett Weinstein and Benjamin Boyce and James Lindsay and Peter Magosian and Jordan Peterson. He's he's out there doing his own thing. He's not like some pastor of an insignificant church that figured out how to listen to stuff all the time. And at the end of it, Alastair McGrath says, almost sounds like you're trying to start a new religion. But again, if you listen to even a lot of people like to. Well, I want to I want a supernatural free religion. It's kind of like gluten free or dairy free or lactose free or, you know, there's always this this thing that's in the natural thing that we want to get out. We want the natural, but we want to we want to get this this this problematic thing out of the natural like gluten. And it's like, you know, it's kind of part of the you're not really going to have organic wheat without the gluten. They add gluten. Yeah, they do. I remember when I worked in a bakery, you know, this high gluten, high gluten flour we used to we used to bake with. But hey, you're not going to you're not going to have if you're going to if you're going to have the wheat, you're going to have the gluten. It's going to be there. I want my wheat without gluten. Oh, OK. It ain't going to be organic and natural then. Well, I mean, organic. OK. Let me keep just mucking around with the words. So you have the quest for this supernatural free religion. W. OK, because they wouldn't call it. No, that's not a religion. Well, what is it? Well, it's well, see, that's where even people who mostly talk about religion s can't help but wander over into religion w. I believe what we've done is we have figured out what higher purpose could be constructed from a secular foundation. You know, what do you who's we in this? You and Heather, that, you know, of everyone around here, you figured it out. Really? I think you and me have been working on programs that are long before us. And for what you do through most of your videos, which is explaining human behavior because of evolutionary programming. Well, and you who notes that there's two tracks. I don't know, Brett, that we're anywhere near that. Self-conscious and capable of the self-consciousness to really discern a lot of this stuff. In other words, I don't think most people can handle the the existential existentialism of a lack of higher external purpose. But for those who can get through that part, you know, in one way or another. There are things that you can pursue as if they are ultimate and they may not be. But it doesn't have to drive you crazy. But that said, I guess the real question is, is there and, you know, and this is. Elitism comes to all of us because once you have an insight, you've now restructured the world into those who have the insight and those who don't. And if if you feel that your insight is in any way unique or creative. Well, now it's the it's the greatest of all elitisms because I myself know it and I bestow it to you, my adoring audience. Just elitism can't be helped. But when it comes to talking about religion, this is so often where it goes because. Well, they've sort of been looking around and saying most people just kind of are religious. But look at these two. They're so darn cute. I love watching them together. They're good. They're just delightful. They really are. And and yeah, anyway, I'll let them talk some more. I shudder every time somebody makes the claim that we have to have religion or else people go crazy and do terrible things. Because if that's true, then we're stuck in a very bad bind, which is that we are not. My cat looks just like my daughter's cat. I didn't even want that cat. But I played this video for my cat or for my for my cat. I played it for my cat. I played it for my daughter and said, look, sweetheart, our cat got into Heather and Brett's house. We are not getting any less capable of understanding what the universe is made of, which means that the necessity of God to the outside world is not. The explanation of what we are and how we got here and what it means. OK, what do you mean by God? Means is ever more remote. So are we just going to continue to go crazy till we destroy ourselves or can people actually get over the existential crisis and come up with things that work as well or better? Work. Come up with things that work work towards what end? Now, I thought about making like, like, did I say this already? I think I did that. I'm thinking of using my I see these little things that they say sometimes. I think I really should just make a little five minute video about that. But I make such long videos on my channel. Maybe I'll just put those on the Vander Clips channel. If you want to know where the Vander Clips channel is, it's the link is down below. There's only 255 subscribers, I think, to that channel, because mostly I've just made little clips that I want to keep around and find. And someone made the comment that, you know, you keep doing this, you might get in trouble with the DMCA. It's like, oh, I don't know. I'm just I'm just trying to use YouTube in a useful way. Anyway, the idea that he has here is basically that, well, what if it is true? What we find from Clay, Clay Rutledge and many other people that have noted that for generally speaking, for human beings, this this religious thing is in really deep. And we're not going to get away from it. And what if this is sort of Ryan Bennett's position in my conversations with him? What what if there's sort of a a religious herd immunity isn't the right word, but it gets it across. What if there's sort of a religious herd immunity that you need that you need a certain degree of religion in your population to actually bring your population to the critical mass for all of these other programmed values? And without the religion, it doesn't work in it. And, you know, how bad does the meaning crisis have to get? And I suspect they have a point, because I think part of what we're seeing is that once you once you ring certain kinds of religion out of the system to one degree or another, it's going to have behavioral and societal implications. And some will look at Europe and say, well, yeah, but rates of church attendance in Europe are quite a bit lower. But yeah, they've got the cathedrals. And, you know, I just read, you know, I should I should pull it up. Here's a piece by Tom Holland about, you know, the this is on the Church of England website. Tom Holland, the preacher who brought me back to church and basically, you know, tiny little tiny little Anglican church that his mother goes to. And let's see, where does he say because he does write so well. Where the service was one is an early one. Eight thirty maybe. And I went in it chiefly, I confess, to keep my mother company. The good son. I wasn't expecting much from it. I anticipated that the congregation would be scanty. The mood downbeat the whole occasion depressing. When I got there, my darkest suspicions seemed confirmed. There were 10 or so people huddled in choir stalls where I used to sing as a boy. And now there's no choir. It could be at Living Stones. Sitting there waiting for the service to begin, it seemed as if I was witness to the decline of the church. That something amazing happened. R.S. Thomas and one of his poems writes of how once in the darkness that was about his hearers, a preacher caught fire and burned steadily before them with a strange light. And that is how it seemed to me. The preacher was the Reverend Anna Claire Thomas and so ring ring. Ross saying everything she said that early morning seemed to be lit by a Pentecostal fire. The reading had been on the baptism of Christ in the River Jordan and her preaching on it was visionary, scholarly, emotionally, all at once. Nobody was there to hear it. Then why should did she do it if nobody's going to be there to hear it? Because God is there, because she's doing it for her Lord. And really, the real question should be for Brett and Heather, why are you pouring yourself out for the world? And maybe someone might argue, well, that's that's actually even more noble because they don't expect any eternal reward. This is a good point. But, you know, if it's there's only 10 people there in that church and she's worked all week to craft the best sermon she can. Any other other motivations? You know, she got into that job because she likes writing sermons and I get all those things, but she's doing it for her God. Tom goes on to write, Perhaps because I was with my mother and my wife as a midwife, I found this perspective an incredibly moving one. The fact that it was 830 with barely anyone to hear it made it all the more powerful. My eyes were opened that morning as they had not previously been to this great tradition of Christian preaching. A tradition that has always been particularly fundamental to Protestant Christianity. I'd been reading a lot about the spirit and the experience of grace. That morning I felt something had descended on me like a fire, like a dove. So I wrote about this on the Twitters this morning, this wonderful piece by Tom Holland about a small church. There's so many like it around the world. Hat tip to an Anglican priest who had sent me the article who brought it to my attention. American culture in particular looks to the big crowd, the big event, a big news for validation. The way you know that Jesus showed up is if there's a crowd all abuzz with excitement. In the midst of this dynamic, they wish to escape the crowd for some VIP access. So in other words, you go to a Jordan Peterson event, you're so thrilled to see all those people there. But what you really want to do is be alone with the master, right? With the great man. After the crowd has validated, then we want the exclusive relationship, the inner ring as C.S. Lewis called it. As a pastor, I find this dynamic to be of marginal utility for the sort of deep transformation people say they want but often resist. If you look at the Ark of Jesus ministry, it goes from the success of Galilee to the abandonment of Jerusalem. Three handpicked disciples who had pledged to be with him. Threats of death notwithstanding can't keep vigil in the night at the cross the men hide and the women and the boy bear witness. The world is littered with tiny struggling churches in the twilight of better days. In such places, you'll find the banal petty foolishness of common humanity. In such places, however, that it's in such places, however, that God shows up sometimes with a wry smile. Didn't expect to see me here, did you? You expected to find me in the big show. There'll be a time for that. I come in mangers from towns where people say, what good can come from there? I come to stock and to woo like a hunter or a lover. I borrowed that from C.S. Lewis in a lot of ways. C.S. Lewis noted that we that we go looking for him as if he's our quarry only defined with both horror and delight that we are his. And I look at Brett and Heather and think, you're playing in dangerous waters here. He's a hunter. He's a lover. He's the hound of heaven. You think that that little itchiness you get at the word supernatural is going to keep you safe from him? I've got my doubts. And there are the tells. We. We is so often a tell because and John Gray made the same thing. We, humanity, is an abstraction. This is just sheer borrowing from Jesus Christ and Christianity rooted in the Jewish Imago Dei. Heather, she's reading Rod Dreher next thing you know, she'll be reading Tom Holland. But we, I mean Brett and Heather and Eric, they want to save humanity. They want to save humanity. What exactly is it you're trying to save? Brett has a host of first draft implicit ideas of good, right, bad and wrong, all this value system, and they aren't givens by biology by any means. See, look at the Wilfred Seller stuff on the scientific versus manifest image. And he shares this with me, his cultural cohort. Where'd we get it from? Tom Holland. He shares this with me, his cultural cohort. Where'd we get it from? Tom Holland will tell you. Where's good old Voltaire? Voltaire, oh I love Voltaire. What a guy. You know, we're sort of back in the 18th century. Jordan Peterson says we're living off the corpse. Yeah, we're living off the 18th century. Oh, I've got to put my, I've got to put my little box back in this corner because that's how I make my slides. We're living off the corpse of the 18th century. You can't find the supernatural in nature. Think about that a few different ways. When it comes to human history, it's remarkably hard to find the line of demarcation. It's not in you phenomenologically. You just experience. I know plenty of people who hear voices. And sometimes they're with me when they hear voices. And I'll say, ah, look around. Anybody else in this car? No, but I hear them. I'm sure you do. Where are they coming from? Well, they're, in most cases, they're coming from the outside. Then in most cases, I'll say they're coming from your mental illness. And if you take the right drugs, you can exercise those voices somewhat. Well, what do we mean by this? What, what, you know, what have what we, what we have are common sense examples. And I picked up this book crap. Now I'm all surrounded by my. I picked up this book because of a by Clifford Gertz about. Well, common sense as a cultural system. And what he goes into is that that's that's how cultures work. We have, we have all these ideas and all these little sayings, they kind of match together into these, into these cultural systems. And we, and we walk around as if they're just reality. And he's an anthropologist, you know, he's an anthropologist, been writing anthropology. It's like, and then there's a lot of realities around. What does that mean? It means we're coded. And so we have a set of common sense examples that we cry foul only when we're, you know, in the tennis science court. But when we're out there doing things, and this is, this is Brett's concern that what if, what if Jordan Peterson is right? And you need God to make the system work, to actually have a stable humanity. That is something that Brett and Heather have enjoyed and and and have enough value and imagination that they look ahead and say, well, I can what I what I imagine the way life should be is is sort of what we have now. But with these certain things fixed, they keep talking about Chesterton's fence. And I keep wondering how much Chesterton have you read? Because Chesterton deals with a lot of this stuff. And he makes the point that we have a real hard time knowing the good. What we have is sort of, well, I kind of want these bits of my life and then minus the bad parts. And the bad parts usually involve pain and suffering. But then you've got Dostoevsky lurking in the background and said, yeah, but I'd smash them out of spite. And then my conversation with Poe is love supernatural? Well, what exactly is love? Science works by looking for causal physical relationships, reducing or eliminating variables, reproducible processes which eliminate. And so they have to say, you history is eliminated from this. Well, maybe we can do archaeology and try and figure out what happened on this. What happened within a certain thin physical layer. But if you know, and I love these, is it Nathan Pyle? He does these little alien cartoons. And and what's so cool about his cartoons is that in some ways you look at life from such a radically different perspective that. Well, what was your wedding day looking like? Two people standing someplace and a third person and maybe a few others. That's well, isn't that every day? Have you never stood with other people? No, but that day was special. Why? What are all the layers that go into making that day different? And then Brett in that video, I think it's it's a tremendously perceptive. Well, well, maybe we have to keep all of the ritual and that's what's kept the Jews together, et cetera, et cetera. And it's like, yeah, but wait a minute. Wasn't this tried in the 18th and 19th century? Wasn't that the whole set up by by positivism that, OK, so maybe there's something to this ritual. So let's keep the ritual and add the other books and you have the Sunday assembly and it's, you know, it just never goes anywhere. People look at the world and engage it from the inside out. You know, what is this a picture of? This is a picture of a little boy. But from the inside, well, we know so much more because you look at his face and maybe he's got a dirty pants or maybe he's getting hungry or maybe dad's just gone on. It kind of looks like my knee. Dad's just gone on talking too long and he and all these other people that he doesn't know as well. And he wants dad to pick him up. I mean, you just look at his little face and. Why do we know what he's thinking? Well, because somewhere way back in our noodle, we've been that little boy. We don't look at the world like a scientist. Jordan Peterson was right with that. And so, again, we're back to the 18th century. I read this in a recent video. Before man understood the causal connection of physical phenomena. Oh, nothing was so natural as to suppose that we were products of intelligent beings, invisible and resembling themselves. That was natural. Where is our evidence that we're not? You can't have evidence that we're not. When philosophers recognize the absurdity of these fables about the gods. Oh, these are absurd. OK, you didn't come to that conclusion by science. You can't. How can you tell if there's purpose or non purpose? In fact, I was listening to this one. Rebecca, I don't remember her last name and James Tour, a friend of mine. That's the problem because I'm commenting on the video I watched earlier in the week. And this morning I was watching a new video and I was thinking, oh, yeah, that one connects to and I want to bring that in. And I want to make a little clip video about that. Maybe I'll just drop it here. So I guess I'm going to have to read her book, too, confronting Christianity. I think sometimes both Christians and atheists can get a little bit confused to think that if we understand more of the science, we're making God smaller or sort of squeezing him out of the equation. And I'm thinking, well, no, actually, because God's in charge of the whole thing. Like every the more I understand about my daughters or my son, actually, the more amazing it is that God created this little person. And through science, we can get little glimpses of how he's been at work. Yeah, I mean, life itself is utterly amazing. And to trivialize it is so unfortunate. Humans have never gotten near the creation of life, nowhere near it. So there's a deep. And now this is James Tuer talking. If you don't know who James Tuer is, do a little research. He's an interesting creator, too. Understanding by the world in that sense. And that's some of the things that I'm commenting on on this on this on my YouTube channel and continuing to be to be coming out with many of these things. But this is a testimony itself of something that's utterly amazing. The ubiquitous life that you find on this planet everywhere. You can't dig a hole anywhere without finding life. And then it's so unlike the rest of all planets. It's so unusual. The life we see here. I want to I want to I want to ask another question. So I want to want to read a little portion from from your book, which I've read this over and over again. So this has really helped me. So I suspect it's going to help some other people. This gets to the question of why science. Why why do things happen that science sometimes is not very good at answering all the why questions? And so it says, if we are no more than the feature that can be described by science, our only story is the evolutionary story. We have no grounds for insisting on human equality, protection of the weak, equal treatment of women or of any of the other ethical beliefs we hold dear. To cite one example among thousands, female primates are routinely sexually assaulted by males to say that this behavior is wrong for humans, that humans should be vigorously resisted and and and punished despite its evolutionary advantages is to say that humans are distinct from other creatures at a fundamental level. Both Christians and secular humanists need an account of humanity that makes this distinction. Christians ground human uniqueness on the biblical claim that we are made in the image of God, just as God calls creation into being. And so we need humans to serve as his representatives on earth in special relationship with their creator and with each other and charged with moral responsibility to maintain their belief about goodness, fairness, justice and so forth. A secular humanist too must hold that humans are moral beings distinct from other primates. The question is on what grounds? And ultimately the answer cannot be scientific. Science can tell us how things are. We need to understand why, for instance, a man might have the drive to commit a sexual assault as an effective means for propagation of his genes. But it cannot tell us why he would be wrong to succumb to that drive. To be sure, we can conduct sociological calculations to see what behaviors turn out better for the group and decide that sexual assault yields a net negative in the overall happiness of the tribe. But to call rape wrong, we need a narrative about human identity that goes beyond what science or sociology can tell us. Fill that up for me. I've read a book since I wrote that, which I could have read before and I'm sort of kicking myself that I haven't, because it gives a very clear atheistic account of humanity as a sort of, actually affirming all of those things, but from an atheist perspective. I don't know if you've read Israeli historian Yuval Noah Harari's book, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind. It's an extraordinary book. Yeah, I read it. I like that book. I like the book a lot. It was in my sermon last week. Oops. Global bestseller continues to be selling millions, as far as I can tell from its Amazon ratings. And Yuval Noah Harari basically assumes that there is no God. And he does the thing which folks often honestly do, which is cite some science and then suggest that it's disproved the existence of God or gods when in fact it hasn't. And he's been called out on that by various scholars. But what he does helpfully, I think, is he says that the idea of human rights is actually a Christian fiction. He says that human beings have no natural rights, just as spiders, hyenas and chimpanzees have no natural rights. He says there are no gods in the universe. And he says there's no such thing as human rights or justice, aside from the collective imagination of humans. And that interests me because I think it's easy sometimes for Christians to say, hey, if you rip God out of the equation, and if you in particular rip the contributions made by the Judeo-Christian worldview and the teachings of Jesus out of our moral equation, then you're not left with something that sort of basically affirms all the things that we deeply believe and hold to be self-evident, like universal human equality and equal rights for men and women and the fact that the poor and the weak and the marginalized can make moral demands on the rich and the strong and powerful. You're actually left with nothing. You've completely evacuated the moral fabric of the universe to where human beings don't have rights, just as spiders don't have rights. And I think that is a memo that has yet to really kind of come home to roost for many of my non-Christian friends. The fact that they deeply believe in human rights, they deeply believe that rape is wrong, they deeply believe that Black Lives Matter, all of these things, that actually if you drill into them, what you find is we believe those things on the basis of Christianity. They're not self-evident truths, they're not things that humans have always believed or that you can somehow kind of scientifically verify. They're actually specific inheritances from Christianity. And I think you all know Harari makes that, from an atheist perspective, that case. A British historian called Tom Holland, also written extraordinary but recently called Dominion, How the Christian Revolution Remade the World, he's also not a Christian, although I think strongly considering becoming one now, partly because of his own research. And he's written this massively fat book, he's looking at 2000 years of Christian history, and he's saying, okay, the reason that people today believe in universal human rights, the reason they believe that abusing, like sexually abusing women is wrong, the reason they believe that we should have a concern for the marginalised, all of this is actually because of Christianity, and it hangs on Jesus' cross, it hangs on the Christian, outrageous Christian claim, that the God of the universe not only became human, but actually submitted to humiliating, contemptible execution in the most disgusting way known at the time. And how this has just fundamentally reshaped the moral fabric of at least the Western world, even when we don't realise it. It even underlies what atheists today believe, it's all founded on Christianity. This wasn't even the clip I was going to play, see if I can find it. It was actually right before that, but I don't want to play the whole thing. So basically the philosophers have these absurd, the astrurity of these fables about gods. Okay, it doesn't say anything about the purpose of the universe. Now I remember what I wanted, the clip I wanted to play. Basically, as many times I listened to the video and I had a thought, and the thought wasn't even in the video, the thought was in my head, but the video prompted my head, that's how a lot of people listen to sermons. Basically the assumption, part of the question about why Christianity arose, or why science arose in the Christian world, was that there was a deep expectation amongst people that the world would be orderly. And there's something about this cause and effect relationship, there's sort of a deep assumption that there's the potential and the reliability of rationality to be there. How was that assumption nurtured mimetically in human beings before that? And it seems to have come from our faith that the world and the god is such that the universe works this way. That if you look for rational cause and effect relationships between things in the world, you will find them. Well, maybe you're just projecting the rational cause and effect relationships on the thing. Well, then science just evaporates. But the fact that we expect to find, what so strikes me is that we look at the world and say, there's no purpose to it. Well, then why do scientists go around looking at tiny minutiae, expecting to find something that looks everything like purpose, which is actually connected in terms of the word we use with reason. The reason this is there is because of this reason. They go around expecting to find purpose, say there's no purpose, but I find it everywhere. I can't believe that there's a purpose behind this, but I keep looking and I find it. The reason for this is that. And again, we're just sort of, we're feeding off the corpse of the 18th century. And of course, this is what science can't tell you. Is there a purpose behind the physical world? The funny thing is that we look at the physical world and assume there's a reason for this to be that way. And we assume that science can elucidate the reason. And then when the big picture comes, we say there's no reason to any of it. Say, well, you found plenty of tiny little reasons. What makes you think that these tiny little reasons aren't related and connected? In fact, the entire utopian dream of humanism within the iron box of secularity asserts that you will continue to find big reasons all the way down, which just screams the question, is there not a big reason for this? Well, I can't find it in the hydrology. If I can't find it separating water into hydrogen and oxygen, well, that's because that's just a little thing. And the only way that you as a child began imprinting all of this stuff and absorbing was it because you assume that these godlike creatures you called your parents were doing things for a reason. And then at some point you discovered, no, they're kind of running through their programming too. But that doesn't mean that reason is divorced from it. It partly means that human beings aren't terribly good at this. There are conscious consequential agents above and beyond human beings. Can we know that? Can we actually exclude that? Well, we have to exclude that when we're looking at science and in the minutia. OK, so you're acting as if they're not there. Fine. Keep doing that. That's not a problem. But then you worry that Jordan Peterson might start forgetting he's acting as if God is real. Well, many have forgotten that they're acting as if that purpose is real. And it's just acting as if all there is is science. Science can't tell you what you desperately want to believe and where you desperately want to go. And this is where if you successfully reprogram us to have a religion W that has no religion S, well, are we still then we? Somehow in order to save us, we're going to have to deprogram human beings according to these enlightenment scientific rules. Well, then we're not people anymore. We're not that same population out there. In order to save us, you have to destroy us. Well, gosh, where have we heard this before? Will we still be we? At what cost? Is there any less ambitious or potentially totalitarian, anything less ambitious or potentially less totalitarian than the agenda of postmoderns that he and Heather are working to resist? So now suddenly we have to reprogram all of humanity to no longer be religious S. Then are they still people? Because how foundational of that is for what a human being is, what a people is? The entire project, it just comes apart in your hands. And that already must be preserved. And in order to preserve it, we have to get rid of anything that seems to go by supernatural. And then Brett's big fear, as in the clip that I that what if it's true that human beings can't be reprogrammed and that if we if we lose the super, if we lose the religion S, then then as groups, we will no longer be able to function. Now you have to ask, what is your God? Are we talking religious methadone that we need some we need some proxy to insert where where this belief and in in divinity and supernatural and the super thing and and all of this stuff that, you know, we got to don't don't use that word karma anymore. Don't say the universe told me or maybe karma in the universe is the religious methadone and and just get rid of all the Christian stuff. But you know, you've got Tom Holland's anxiety below that. Well, if you get rid of all the Christian stuff, do you still will you still no longer believe? And that's where it gets again back full circle to I think Brett's incredibly brilliant observation. Well, well, maybe the Jews were able to survive because they kept the practices alive and and maybe all the riders on those Jewish elephants were saying, oh, I don't believe there's a God, but we still we still have the Sabbath and we still have the Seder and we still go to temple and we still yada yada yada. We we do that just because just because why? Because we have to keep our people. Yeah, but but that's an ethnicity that you're trying to keep alive. I mean, the really incredible thing about the Jews. And again, I this is until my great, great grandfather decided to become Dutch reform. For what reason? I don't know. I was part of that group. Me. How was I part of that group? That was 100 years ago or more. There was more than 100 years ago. It was 130 years ago. What what what? Look at the way I talk. It's so strange before I was part. What I was there when my great, great grandfather sent his son to America to assimilate and associate with the Dutch Calvinists in Western Michigan. Well, what about what about the Friesians on my mother's side? You know, why aren't I associating with them in the context of this video? I'm you know, 50 percent of my genetics comes from them. So, you know, a substitute drug given that, you know, you know what methadone is. I don't have to explain it. I don't have to practice without all these nasty supernatural truths. And so, well, well, we Jews are going to keep talking like we're secular, but we're going to keep doing all this Jewish stuff and that's going to keep us alive. And what is the thing you're actually trying to keep alive? Well, the point I was making is the Jews are very strange because this whole business of of the of the ethnicity and the religion being one package. That's a leftover from the Iron Age. And in some ways, you know, celebrity atheists, they keep whining about this Iron Age text. Well, you know, as if Christians were still owning slaves and sweeping the dust of the temple to give to their wives that they suspect of infidelity. We've got this whole group of people that's kind of still practicing this enormous anachronism. And on the basis of which, Brett Weinstein says, well, maybe this is a clue about how we can have religious methadone to save the world, to save us so we can so so we'll stop believing in the super thing. It's so funny since it's it's the propositional aspect of religion as that many who wish to see it go away complain about because I mean, Sam Harris sits there and all these crazy Christians who go to church and pray and Brett's like, well, maybe you can go to church and bow your head, but don't don't don't believe in the super thing. Don't don't don't think about God or well, maybe you'll warm up to Jordan Peterson's functional God, at least in this. But it's going to be very interesting to see if Jordan Peterson, if Jordan Peterson's most recent trip to the underworld through getting off Benzos have changed what he is and isn't willing to say on these things. That's going to be very interesting. And I think a bunch of us are sort of waiting, you know, waiting to hear what he's going to have to say. The post-Christian project is almost 300 years old. Many successes that most religious people have accommodated themselves to and enjoy. That's the truth of the Enlightenment. But it but its aim to end religion s has simply continued to fail. And now it's now as its worldwide cultural hegemony is slipping away. I'm skeptical it will blaze a new trail. You know, read Diderot, read Voltaire, read read the Philosophes. You know, this was their project. And in many ways, the the deists who founded the United States adapted some of this project to a group of 13 colonies, some of which were deeply religious. But of course, the religious the religion of the Puritans was deeply Protestant and therefore, you know, deeply impacted by all of the continued evolution of the code. And the rise of the new atheist in Jordan Peterson, I think I think Dr. Jim is right about that, are the signs of its departure just as the new temple in India and the Hagia Sophia's transformation into a mosque that the Tom Holland spoke about is true. This this is where we're at. And in some ways, this group reminds me of 19th century Christians who are having their own existential panic at their forms of Christianity slipping away. And I want to be careful with this because the truth is the stubbornness and the determination of of the the fundamentalists that sort of became modified into the evangelicals is part of what has kept the Bible around. So I think when you look at the total system, I thank God for Brett and Heather. They're doing important service because just like I have a consciousness Congress in the inside, they're part of this larger conversation. And hey, stick to your guns, you know, stick to your guns and keep making your point and and may the most durable, important parts of the Enlightenment be with you. And then survive. So there's an important role for the IDW right now, even though in some ways it's again reminds me of certain kinds of 19th century fundamentalists. There's an irony. Because the post-Christian project has been failing for 300 years and and overall it's in decline and something new is going to have to come. The meaning crisis is here. Here's a picture of John Verbecky and Chris Mastro Pietro. I haven't given them enough attention in my videos lately. You know, these two recent tracks that caused the meaning crisis. One is that we discovered the more we learned about physical world through science, that the physical world is stranger than we can imagine. And that human beings are increasingly hackable, giving us a crisis of agentic confidence. Is persons real? Sam Harris says no, but then goes on acting like a person. In modernism, the world was dead and we alone were alive, had agency, respected as persons. We're sacred. Human life was sacred and we've seen that slipping, although it's it's always been tenuous. Now we are anxious that we are dead inside too. And that the whole universe is dead. And is there an agent within this programmable assassin robot to reprogram itself? Again, I hear that and I just if I ever talk to Brett, that's going to have to come up in a nice way. Y'all know me. What we've got from the likes of Douglas Murray and Tom Holland and Jordan Peterson are early skinned knees in a very dark tunnel. And they're feeling their way through and they're remembering, yeah, we used to have flashlights. That's kind of how we saw things before. And so don't don't get rid of those flashlights. We're going to need them because I tried I tried making progress in the dark tunnel and I still. Yeah, yeah, we need the lights. We need the lights. And even though the path is going to be different. They don't pretend to have the answer, but they're seeing Nietzsche's point. And, you know, it's been I haven't heard Douglas Murray talk about that as much, but it's been interesting how both Jordan Peterson and Tom Holland have come back to Nietzsche again and again and again in this. So early skinned knees in a dark tunnel. Well, we'll see if I do a commentary on their video. I kind of want to because there's so many interesting things in it, but I have to I want to find I have to segregate the clips so I can select them and yada yada yada. We'll see if I have time to do that because. So often I'm robbing Peter to pay Paul to make these videos so. And actually usually robbing Paul to pay Peter. Anyway, thank you for your time and attention.