https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=OXa2ruZSGIA

 I'm on a video fast right now. I'm not allowed to watch videos for a week. Are you an Exodus 90 person? No, but I have to detox from crappy videos. By the way, Mark, how do you sign into this group? We are live on the internet now, so just so y'all know, we are there. I like the mask. I like the mask, Chad. Best mask ever. It's a cigarette mask. Oh, well, welcome. I haven't done one of these for a while, so it's about time. Wonderful to see the usual suspects. I hit this little button that says, hi, show non-video participants. If your camera isn't on, I can't necessarily see you unless you're doing something like Jean Cavalier. If you do talk, people won't see you, but that might be okay for you. We had a question that maybe we'll talk about because that was really a great question. I don't know if there's something we want to talk about before we perhaps talk about that question of contending versus wrestling. Again, thank you all for turning on your cameras. It's much better to talk to faces. Anybody want to say something? We have that question to deal with if we want to unless you want to say something first. Paul, I didn't know if you saw. You're going to be on rationality rules. I colonized the thumbnail. How about that? Nathan, I told Nathan on Twitter, I said, after your exile from the BOM, you've turned to the dark side. I made a bunch of gifs about him like Anakin and rationality rules like Palpatine. Palpatine. Nice. I just didn't know you were an apologist, Paul. I'm very surprised. I guess so. At least a bad one, I suppose. That would be a good YouTube channel. Bad Christian apology. That's what Nathan does, right? I don't know. No, that's a series. He has like a series of bad apologizes or something. It's always so hard for me to have an understanding of where he's at because sometimes he's a Christian and sometimes he's not. He just keeps going back and forth. Maybe that keeps things interesting. Maybe we should do a little introductions. Now, Chad has been on just about every one. Mark has been on just about every one. He's got his own YouTube channel, Navigating Patterns. He however does not have a Patreon, so his channel is ad free and there's no begging for money. No, I've got a subscribe star. Do you beg for money on your videos? No, I do not ever beg for money on anything that I do. I didn't think so. Over there on the Bridges of Meaning Up channel, we got t-shirts for sale now with Chad the alcoholic talking about wrestling with God. That's right on topic. Also, it's a lie. We got nine digit Eric, clean shaven, my goodness. The beard is gone. It's probably driving his daughter around. That's usually when he comes in. Now, I can't say your name because I can't read the letters. Why don't you introduce yourself? It's all right. I was the guy who did a sonnet a while ago. Oh yeah, that's right. That's right. That's right. I remember that. So who else shows up? Oh, Bazzanis just showed up. All right. Well, maybe we should take the question. So let's, I got asked the question when I was in the other room. I thought this would be a good question to talk about. So bring it on. Okay. So this thought arose within me. So Jacob wrestles with God and then God names him Israel, which is he who contends with God. And then Israel goes and carries out that name all throughout their history, the constantly wrestling with God throughout the Old Testament and up to Jesus. And as a Christian, I was brought up to submit to God and to surrender to God and to abandon myself to God and do whatever God tells me, the Bible or the gap. And so this is written in our Bible. And so one of my questions that's within me is what good is produced by wrestling with God? And then I started, I was talking with my friends and we started comparing the case of Job and Jacob, where Job has all these horrible things that happen to him. And like by and large, he just submits to God and he says, though he slay me, still will I. Versus Jacob, who he's always working an angle. He's coming out with his brother Esau. He's getting his birthright. He's going and he's doing, he's doing finagling things with sheep under Laban's under Laban. And then he's coming back to meet Esau and this person shows up and so he decides to wrestle. And then he figures out that it's the angel of the Lord. And so he says, I won't let you go until you bless me. And he's one who's wrestling with God. And no one ever taught me how to wrestle with God. And if that's a story that's being played out in the Bible, and if that's something that's producing some good, what is that? And how do I do that properly? And where does that lead? That's a great question. To me, though, Paul, this brings up the thing we were talking about just before he brought that up in the channel, which is intimacy, right? Which is that conflict resolution in the moment that allows you to have a different or deep, you know, hard to measure, we'll say, using quantity sort of a relationship. So I don't know if that helps you. It's weird that it came up after that discussion, right? In light of that discussion. I have some wise friends. One of the things they brought up was this idea of the Jewish rabbi who will argue and argue and argue. And to us as outsiders, it'll seem like they're just having a horrible breakdown relationship, a huge conflict and all these things. But then they'll finish their argument and go home and love each other. And there's something about that contending and that wrestling that is contextualized by the relationship. And so like an idea is, OK, maybe we wrestle with God, but maybe it's wrestling within the context of this larger container, this larger relationship these places into. And I said, well, OK, but we see with Israel, they're wrestling with God, but they're also like one of the contentious points of their wrestling is whether they will work with God or they will worship other gods. And so that feels like it's outside of the frame and outside of the container. If you're going up to Baal Shemalom to worship him, that seems outside of that container. But that is especially in the Old Testament, up to the exile. The central question for Israel is whether they will worship God or the gods. And OK, I get this idea of the relationship. Maybe God places a covenant around them, even within that, they're within that covenant. Take it up. Someone else with a thought? I've always interpreted wrestling with God in the context of Israel struggling to not fall for corruption. Like there's this story line going that Peterson also brings up that every time things seem to be going Israel's way, it falls down again because of corruption. And then a new prophet has to be sent to shake them up and Moses goes up to the mountain and they fall into corruption. They fall into sleep, into sloth. And he comes down and has to shake them up. So that is my take on wrestling with God. I don't know if it extends beyond the tribe of Israel or if it applies to all of Christianity. So I don't like that. Here's why. I don't like that because then the object of your wrestling is you're not wrestling with God, but you're wrestling with the corruption. You're wrestling with the temptation, wrestling with the world, the flesh and the devil. Of course, in my Christian framework, of course, we wrestle with these things. But that's different from wrestling with God. The opponent is different. Like if I'm wrestling with the devil, I want to get rid of the devil. I want to be God. But if I'm wrestling with God, then I'm wrestling with someone other than the devil and someone I can't just kick out. Like the end result of me wrestling with God is me getting rid of God. Did Cain wrestle with God with his actions? Good question. So the Hebrew word is, in some ways it's contextualized by the story because they are physically wrestling. But the Hebrew word is to basically to persist, to exert oneself. And so it's sort of the opposite from fleeing. And the way the story goes, maybe I should just read the story. And where the story comes from. Go ahead. I was going to say in relation to Cain at least, it would be kind of like, hey, we're having a fun, an invigorating wrestling match, but then one of the participants doesn't win. So basically stomps off and throws a fit and kills his brother. So it's helpful to know the context of the story. So Jacob has, of course, been conniving his whole life and he's been a very successful conniver. He connived the birthright away from Esau and because of that he had to flee. And then Laban snookered him by getting him to marry Leah and he wasn't happy with that and gave him Rachel, but he had to work another seven years. So 14 years for his two wives, pretty costly wives. And of course then you have the battle of the wombs between Leah and Rachel and that goes on. And then Jacob's kind of had it and he wants to go his own way, but he also wants more than just wives as his payment. He wants livestock, which is basically wealth. And so you have the whole thing with the branches and the multiplication. And so he snookers Laban, he gets the best of Laban and then he flees. And of course, Rachel is sitting on the household gods, but they managed to get with that. And you know, God spares his life with Laban. Laban's going to...so now he's heading back home and he gets news that of course Esau is coming with 400 men. And of course the 400 men, it's likely to assume, are not a welcome party in a good sort of way. And so what Jacob does then is he very much sets up a hierarchy of what he loves the most and the least and sends everything ahead figuring at some point you think about, you know, if Esau is going to devour, maybe he'll be satiated by the time he gets to Jacob and won't kill him. And so then you get all the way to the end of it. And that same night he arose and took two of his wives, two maids and his 11 children. So now his family, what he most values and crosses the ford at the j-book and he took them and sent them across the stream. So he sends all of that first. And so you know what is absolutely most important to Jacob is himself. And Jacob was left alone and a man wrestled with him until the break of day. And so he's all by himself and basically someone attacks him. And when the man saw that he did not prevail against Jacob, he touched the hollow of his thigh and Jacob's thigh was put out of joint as he wrestled with him. And so you get all the way to the end and Jacob has held his own. And so now the man touches his the hollow of his thigh and and he's crippled. And well, what do you what do you do now, Jacob? What do you do now? You've lost and and let me go for the day is breaking. And so this mysterious stranger will only come at night. It's just so cool. But Jacob said, I will not let you go unless you bless me. So even then, Jacob's not going to let go. And he said to him, what is your name? And he said, Jacob. Then he said, your name shall no longer be Jacob. And Jacob is this trickster. He's this he's this heel grabber who is always finding a way to get what he wants at the expense of others. And and no more be Jacob. But Israel, for you have striven with God, you've exerted yourself with God and with men and have prevailed. Jacob asked him, tell me, I pray your name. But he said, why is it that you ask my name? And then he blessed him. So Jacob called the place Peniel, saying, for I have seen God face to face, yet my life is preserved. The sun rose upon him and he passed Peniel, limping because of his thigh. Therefore, to this day, the Israelites do not eat the sinew of the hip, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh and the sinew of the hip. So it's very much that. Jacob stays, I could phrase it this way, Jacob, Jacob persists in staying in relationship with the God who is in some ways his enemy and demanding that he bless him. And if you look at the story of Israel, I mean, it's this is God's chosen people. And if you look at their track record, they could very well have asked that that he choose someone else, because if being his blessed people means that, you know, they're always a minor nation and they're always at the at the mercy of more powerful nations and empires around them and whatever they do, they seem to fail at but not get erased. Then and so I think I think. I don't know that submission and persisting are necessarily at odds with one another, but they're definitely not the same. And so we see, you know, when it say look at the story of Abraham and Abraham and Sodom, where Abraham begins to debate God. And I would say submission is obedience, but wrestling is prayer. I was going to say one thing, too, is that Israel didn't exactly fail at everything. They typically seem to get so successful that they thought they didn't need God anymore. And that's the failure that ultimately sunk them. Yeah, there was a lot of that, too, but they had a lot of they had a lot of hard times. But but I think I think in some ways, obedience is submission and wrestling is prayer because they don't leave the relationship. And and it's faith is so often I just started reading T.M. Thurman's book. What's the title of it? Something like Making God Real, something like that. But, you know, I really liked what she noticed right off right at the right at the beginning of it, which it seems like everybody misses, which is that people think that church is just this kind of mercenary relationship with God. And of course, for some it is. But faith is, as the book of Hebrews says, and as you find all the way along, faith is staying in relationship with God, even if and when it seems the relationship isn't working for you, which is, of course, exactly what happens on the cross, too. My God, my God, why have you forsaken me? Quotes Psalm 22. So. I don't know. What do you think of that? What does it what does it look like to be a sycophant for God? With God is like. That is something about that that seems off, too. Like, it's like it's a bad attitude or the wrong attitude, I think. A sycophant isn't being honest in 360 degrees. A sycophant is finally a manipulator, someone who's trying to manipulate up. And and that is that is clearly offensive to God, because that's sort of at the heart of all sorts of idolatries trying to manipulate up. Because and you can't read the Psalms and not see people wrestling and contending with God. I don't like this downgrading of contention to persisting. But that that feels like a Weasley Christian move to try and hold things into a Christian frame. So I. Because it changes the object of orientation, if we're talking about persisting with God and we're talking and we can quite easily go into talking about, oh, there's all these different problems around me, I'm going to hold fast to God all the same. I'm used to that. I'm doing. That's where I come from. That makes sense. But that's not what Jacob did, and that's not what Israel did. That's. Israel and Jacob sat across the table from God and said, no, you're telling me to do the thing. I'm not going to do the thing. I'm going to wrestle with you because I don't want to do the thing. I want you to give me this blessing, not this person. I want to have this land. I want to have these blessings. I don't want to do that thing. I also want to go after these guys. I want to have my wallet and I don't want to participate with your crazy Jesus program. I want to do the Pharisee thing and do temple and do the things that we do. It's it manifests differently throughout time. But there's that wrestling. And in a sense, what I saw in Ezra and Nehemiah is that wrestling was finally broken with the Babylon and then with the captivity and coming back from captivity. There's this air of brokenness through the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, where they walk back and it's raining and they're looking at this piddly little temple they built that's a few rocks thrown together and the repenting of having taken it like Canaanite wives and then that's just it's 400 years of silence almost like the Malachi, but it's not the same thing. Like the the time of kings and prophets, the time of giants, big sins and big repentances and big miracles. And then by by Ezra and Nehemiah, everything reduces into these little pedestrian material problems. And then that goes to the we come to Jesus and a struggle with the Pharisees. And almost you could characterize that struggle as the Pharisee saying, no, we tried doing unorthodox things and we tried wrestling and it failed. We got captivity in Babylon. And Jesus is pulling in these crazy ideas and almost starting this wrestling thing again, you're saying he's pushing on the borders of the Sabbath. He's taking these these these old Jewish ideas and applying them in very, very uncomfortable ways and unorthodox ways. He's bringing back that that that wrestling this. Where he's not we don't see in the text or in the Gospels, Jesus wrestling with God as much as we see him wrestling with the religious authorities of the time, which is like kind of the manifestation of God. So it yeah, I just come back to that. I don't like this. Oh, it did. The word the word translates persistence. And so we call it persistence. I feel like that's dogging the question. So it sounds like Jacob didn't know who he was wrestling with. Right. That's going to have some significance. Yeah. I would say Jesus wrestles with himself, right? Like he wrestles with temptation, he wrestles and that's wrestling with God. So. Well, there's something to be said to that all wrestling comes with a cost. Jacob prevailed, but. He he lost his hip. Jesus prevails, but. It came at a cost worth it, the cost worth it, like something is produced by the wrestling, but is that what the cost that you pay for it? Well, that's why I imagine if. For the overall good, you actually achieve it and expands everything. If there is no wrestling and the thing gets static and it just dies. So like it's to me what you're talking about, the price thing, it's like, well, nobody's going to wrestle. So I guess I'll go to the map for you guys. And and then that causes the expansion, which when I look at like everything, all these stories, I don't know them well. The thing is constant expansion over and over and over and over and over. Right. And and so like nobody's nobody's going to go to bat or nobody's going to step in so we can get this, get the creation doing what it's supposed to do. Then Christ goes in and wrestles, as you said, with maybe even just everybody else's idea of God. Which at that time was God, right? How could it be anything else? It's all to a certain extent, I mean, with all those other examples where basically humans wrestled with God and lost and all that briefly, Jesus wrestled with humans and allowed himself to be pinned just to see what it was like. Well, maybe not just now, probably not just to see what it was like. But but yeah, I mean, that was an interesting finishing juxtaposition. Yeah. What would have happened if Jacob hadn't stolen his birthright from Esau? Or if he hadn't like fled and like finagled his way into a wife or finagled his way into having a lot of capital? Well, part of what, this gets so hard, because part of it, I'm about to use this word that I'm doing a lot of thinking and talking about lately, it's his nature. And nature isn't, I mean, we tend to think of nature as sort of the static thing. And nature is almost sort of a destiny. It's exactly where he's heading. I mean, right from the start, that's who Jacob is coming out of the womb. And one of my favorite parts of the Jacob story is is the episode at Bethel where, you know, God appears to him. Here's here's the portal basically between heaven and earth. And the messengers of God are going up and down and up and down. And then God basically gives Jacob the the Abrahamic blessing and says, this is this is what I'm going to give you. And Jacob wakes up after having given the blessing, you know, one should just say thank you. And he basically says, well, you know, if you come through with that, I'll give you a tenth back. And it's like. This is who this guy is. I mean, he's he's he is going to wrestle with everyone and everything, and he does. And now it's and this is where I think we got to be careful with the hero's journey, because Jacob does this and. You know, Jacob sort of peaks after the after the Esau story and then the focus begins to shift. So after Esau and basically God saves him from Esau chapter, let me chapter and chapter 33, Jacob then goes to Shechem. But then in Shechem, you have the rape of Dinah. So Dinah, the daughter of Leah, who he had born to Jacob. And then, of course, two of Jacob's Dinah's brothers basically snooker. They're like Jacob, they're like their father. And they they snooker the crew at Shechem and says, well, you know, you can intermarry with us and you can become part of us. But we got this weird little thing called circumcision. So if you all do that, then you can be part of us. And of course, no anesthesia or anything. So they all are right. You know, Dinah must have been some kind of woman. So the whole clan gets gets out the knife. And after they've all done it, it's like, ah, and they slaughter them. And Jacob's not down with this at all. And, you know, from, you know, and so Jacob returns to Bethel, that sort of finishes the loop. And he but then but then suddenly the story changes. You know, you have the birth of Benjamin and the death of Rachel. You have the death of Isaac and you have the, you know, the Toledote for for Esau and the clans of Edom, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And then the story is going to ship then to Joseph. And even in the Joseph story, Jacob is sort of a. He's sort of an NPC in that story. He doesn't do a lot. So how do you how do you think Jacob would have responded if God had asked you sacrifice his son to him? Oh, yeah. That's a fun question. Oh, well, I like I like this frame, Paul, that you brought up. I mean, it was something I was just thinking of. And then you and then you said it right, which is it seems in the story like Jacob is approaching God as honestly as he approaches everybody else, according to his nature, right, or maybe his tell us might be a better word there. Right. And I think that's what he's drawn for whatever reason. Right. Who knows? Right. To do this, this negotiation in every instance, I'm always going to negotiate with you. I don't care what you offer. I don't care what I want. It doesn't matter. I'm going to negotiate. I'm always going to try to get a better deal. And then and then he's approaching he's approaching every situation the same. He's completely consistent. And maybe that's where the lesson is. It's not in the in the struggle. I mean, in some sense, we all wrestle with God, right. In the Christian frame anyway, right. You can imagine because God's everywhere and we wrestle with everything anyway because nature, right, because as in nature, the natural stuff around us. And so maybe it's more about staying true to who you are, to your tell us. Well, and I, you know, I appreciate the pushback. Now, is it Jean or Jean or what? How do you what's your preference? Jean Jean. All right. I didn't ask you your pronouns. It's bad. I'm sorry. I I shouldn't talk. I just shouldn't talk. But I got a question. What if there was no snake in the garden? Hang on, hang on before we get all the way back there. Paul, it always goes back to the garden. It does. It does. But. I almost lost my train of thought. Past orally. The tension that you are pointing out. I see working out in people's lives. I know people who are obedient and. And they are blessed. I've seen people who are obedient and they are blessed. They don't contend much. And in many ways, that's sort of their nature. And and they are blessed for it. And. You know, Abraham is sort of that way. He doesn't he doesn't go at God like Jacob does, but he's also a little bit more smarmy in terms of his obedience. Often, you know, he's passing off his wife as a sister and he's he's always trying to prime the pump on this great nation thing because, you know, nothing's nothing's work to get the kid and God strings about 25 years. So people, people are different. But I've also known others who. You know, there's real reasons why they've left the church, they've left the faith, they they're out there in the world, but when I get them one on one and I talk to them, I can tell. That they haven't left the ring, you know, they haven't left the ring. And now I. Part of being a Calvinist, I think, means really holding back on trying to sit in God's seat and judging others. And I think Calvinism affords a radical openness that that God is finally God and he gets to have his say in his way with us in terms of what he does with us both in this age and the next. So I, you know. I always want to give, I always want to maintain hope and give hope to the Strugglers. Because I've seen others who just kind of. You know, they hit they hit a hard patch and boom, they're out and they just become a self saver and they go out into the world and they, you know, they're just they're going to pick up the next self salvation project and they're going to work it and it's like, all right, you know, good luck to you. I haven't I haven't seen any self salvation projects that that finally satisfy me because I want more. So I, you know, your your your pushback, I think, is really well founded. And it I there are I find surprising people who maybe on the outside look like people who have walked away. But if you get to know them a little closer and a little more intimately, you find there. There's there's still there still in the ring. This is not an impersonal question for me, like in a sense, I'm asking myself what kind of person I should become. And like I grew up in maybe I have a more Abraham kind of nature. But wait a minute, there's a shape of story, too. And Jacob's story is woven in here. And I don't have an intuitive understanding of Jacob's story. Yeah. You know, you were with somebody earlier when this question came up, John. Oh, yes, literally. OK, so it happened yesterday, the day before. I I realized it started when I was wrestling with someone or it was like for a theater thing and my I it was a moment and it was there. And then a few hours later, this question just suddenly arose in me. So what was it like? What was it like to when you were wrestling? I just read a book. On Pride by Tim Keller, a little booklet, and he was talking about basically his thesis with the antidote to pride, self-forgetfulness, and it felt a whole lot like self-forgetfulness, where all of my being was focused into a single point. I forgot all self-consciousness and all being and it was all push and sweat and strain. Because you really have to get to the core of the matter, right, when you're wrestling with people, you have to get to that center of gravity and they're resisting and they're coming at you. So I think that that's got to be significant, right? The integration with the between theoretical and practical physical material, because there are some very real realities that come into play when you're literally wrestling with somebody. And I think that's the most important thing. There are some real realities that come into play when you're literally wrestling with somebody. That, I mean, you can have all the right moves, but and you might even have the best strategy, but if that dude weighs 150 pounds more than you, chances are you're not moving him if he has some competence. I remember, so I don't fight. I'm a mother of peace. I remember this one moment some years ago, it was a friendly match, but this guy had six inches on me and 50 pounds on me. And so I just jumped for his throat. I got a hold of it and hung on to it. And we were crashing around breaking tables and things until someone finally managed to pull us apart. And that was what that was. And we didn't do that again. I had a sweet mate that was four, 11 and a half, and he was a good wrestler. And I was six, four at that point. I was probably 190 maybe. I remember we used to wrestle. I could never pin the guy. He was so frustrating. You could never pin me. There was just too much of me, but I could never pin him because he was too good of a wrestler. Yeah, no, there's you're really onto this thing with wrestling now because it's it's. We sit here and we talk our our our thinky talky world, and it's so bodiless. Well, maybe that's the line, right? Maybe that's where quantity, your weight, your height and quality, right? How how good you are maneuvering actually. And maybe that's what it's for. Like it's to meet the material and the ethereal, right. The spiritual. That's that's that's where it all comes together. And sure, you can survive in just the quantity realm for quite a while. Right. And with no problem. But you're still you're missing all this stuff. And maybe you think about it, right. Maybe you think about maybe maybe you use like a cult, right. You draw the pentagram and you put it in the candles and you do the incantation. You try to you try to reenchant that way. But maybe the proper way to reenchant is to wrestle, is to is to combine the two that quality of of thought, that quality of strategy, that quality of conflict and the material together in in this greater conflict that results in the intimacy because wrestling is an intimate thing to do. Like boxing is not as intimate as wrestling. They're both they both have that quality of intimacy. Like in boxing, you're going to watch the guy's feet. Why are you watching his feet? Like, what's up with that? Why are you watching his shoulders? Right. Why are you watching? Why are you watching not the person, but pieces of the person? Well, because that's how you get intimate with with his motion in some sense. And in wrestling, it's all intimate. Where is he in relation to me? And Jiu Jitsu, Brazilian Jiu Jitsu is like that. Right. A lot of martial arts are like that, where it's your your relationship with the other person is a quality within the arena, literally the fighting arena that you're participating in. And that's that's the meeting of this quality and this quantity. The you know, the video I did on the commentary on the Peugeot-Vervecky talk and then the. The book, the excerpt from the Karl Truman book, the Lerman book is sort of going in the same direction in that Peugeot, you know, challenges Vervecky on the question of, well, how do we know we're dealing with a consciousness? A conscious being, an agent, and really the question is always. It's back and forth, and that's where you get into the intimacy and the wrestling. And you know, you get to Paul and Ephesians, of course, you know, we battle not against rest and flesh and blood. I should I should look at the language of that in Greek. And of course, Paul. In Second Corinthians 12. You know, talks about, in a sense, his wrestling with God in that, hey, there's a thorn in the flesh. Why don't you? It's a it's a messenger from Satan. That's how Paul describes it. And you would think, well, surely if God has any job, it would be to take away this messenger from Satan and and no, I won't because my grace is sufficient for you, which in its way is saying you're feeling the limits of my grace and I've given you enough. I've given you all I want to give you. And so I have reasons for not giving you everything you ask. I have a friend who has a pretty dramatic gift of healing, praying for others. But I also know that in his life, he has some pretty dramatic things that he would certainly love. I mean, really close things that he would love the Lord to heal, and he doesn't. And so other people in his life are like, well, if if if God listens to your prayer so well, why doesn't he take care of those things? And I see that it's Second Corinthians 12. And so. God seems to. You know, God disciplines, he disciplines those he loves the Book of James. And this is very, it's very, it's very Jacob to Israel ish. Because look how he look how he look how he engages Israel, just. And Israel is this strange thing where it. It persists even today. And. Well, it should have no right to exist. And here it is. I don't mean the nation state, I mean the people and even their faith. And it's just insane. It has the most right to exist because it's the closest to God and therefore it's the most real. Yeah, yeah. And then, of course, the church and comes out of this struggle, this great split that happens around Jesus and great fight, I mean, you can't read the New Testament and not see that on one side they've got the Roman pagan culture on the other side. They've got the it's it's an infight within the. Jewish diaspora community means. And the church has been fighting. The church is always fighting. You know, there's always you read the church fathers and there's all this contention and all this contending and doesn't end. I'd like to bring up one point that might be relevant. You you talk about God, number one and God, number two, Paul. And when God, number one, as I understand it, is roughly speaking, nature and wrestling with God, we were talking about that. Jacob had a certain type of nature and wrestling with God. I might be putting too much literally into this, but it seems like one thing is that you are wrestling with this personhood. But part of God is also this this blind part, this nature that that just goes on by itself, that you as a spirit need to wrestle with and your body wrestles then with the spirit of God, so it's like wrestling from both sides. Yeah, I was reading, so I've been reading this book by Andrew Preston, who was on The Rest is History, basically about the. American just a baby, basically the the history of militaristic American. I was reading about the Puritans, the Pequot War and then King Philip's War and the Puritans. So these are my you know, these are my English cousins, the Puritan preachers, cotton, matter, increased matter, all of the justification of of why, you know, first they come over and our mission is to is to deliver the Indians from Satan and that then, you know, of course, when things go bad with the Indians, they're going to they're just going to kill them. And and of course, the Indians are killing them, too. And it's it's and all of this justification. But in all of this, it's always well, when things go bad, this is very much God. Number one, when things go poorly, what do I mean things going poorly? Well, you know, King Philip has just burned a dozen English settlements that that's going poorly. And so then there's this double thing that happens. Number one, we have to examine ourselves to see how we have how we have failed God and and then we're going to enlist God in our struggle against them and and so that's and you find the divine passive in the Bible all the time and that's always sort of the one hand of God. And so so one and two is also sort of right and left in Peugeot in terms. So. This is hard stuff. Yeah, I think that struggle, too, belongs with the church and and and in the church and Neurom was on here earlier talking about speaking up in church, he's speaking about a specific incident where they were like, well, we got to give we got to give money to this cause overseas sort of a thing. And he was like, what about the people in our community? Can't we give money to them? And a bunch of people in church are going. You know, they're they're they're agreeing silently, silently, silently. And the preacher is like, you know, no, what's wrong with you? We have to we have to take this money and give it to these other people who aren't you know, who aren't here right across the ocean. And and he got chastised for speaking up. And it's like, oh, that's really interesting. Like, where's the church to to fight for the local community? Because that's what that was his whole point was that we've got these resources, let's use them here first. Like not never there, but here first. And nobody wanted to hear that. Well, the preacher in particular didn't want to hear that. Right. Nobody was sufficiently supported. And of course, this ended with with everybody saying, you need to go to seminary and start a church because that's what we do on BOM. Apparently, Paul, you set the standards. Now everyone's like, yeah, you should start a church. Right. I'm so Protestant Protestantism. You just started to start a new one. We they're doing it wrong. We'll do it right over here. I mean, if you're Catholic, you can go start a monastery. Right. That's right. Or an order or you can do you can do home home church as a Catholic. That's a thing. So you could you could do that. That's that was another option that was discussed. But then what is this start a new church, Paul? Like when does the what are the criteria for the reformation ending? That's my that's my question. What would have to happen? Jesus coming back. It'll end before then, depending on. How late, how long he takes. It's interesting how so again, I've, you know, I've reading that history and I mean, part of the Puritan thing was part of the reason you got to convert the Indians is because otherwise they're going to get converted by the Catholics. And that's giving them over to the devil. I mean, it's viciously anti Catholic. I mean, that and that fight was that fight has been, you know, brutal, really up until even in my lifetime, it simmered down by the second half of the 20th century. But well, and there are reasons. Oh, yeah. Worries about the Jesuits in particular are like, oh, well, no wonder why. But and and the King Philip's War, King Philip is French. Right. The Indians, everyone thinks of the Indians versus the settlers. The Indians were very much pawns in the England. France. Well, they gave him that name. They gave him that name and it was it was in better times. And they sort of associated him with the father of Alexander the Great. So Medicon. So it's complicated. But, yeah, the French, the Spanish, they were evil because they were Catholic. And and and of course, the great fight in England was with the fear of the Catholics coming back and taking the place over and that just set up so much history. I want to know at what point and I don't think that we can know just by like staring at the Bible, but at what point does Jacob get the impression that he's wrestling with God and not just some weird dude who showed up in the middle of the night and started attacking. Because I've had a number of dreams where I think afterwards that I interacted with some kind of a spiritual being, but it's not necessarily obvious at the time. And I don't know. I don't know how to explain it. But like I got like a vague, ominous sense partway through the dream. And it's like, oh, I shouldn't be going along with whatever is going. So, I mean, clearly that says a lot about my spiritual life. What kind of beings that I meet in my dreams are not usually good ones. But it's like. There's this kind of moment where I have to be like, OK, there's something going on here, and I just looked up because the spiders that are in the East Coast of America now, they're actually from Japan, they're the big yellow ones, the spooky ones that nobody likes because they're ugly. Those are associated with the like half spider, half woman monster that like lures people into houses and there are all these stories where the samurai will like fall asleep. And then, you know, a woman comes up and is like, hey, my daughter's interested in marrying you. And he goes over to the mansion. He's like, I'm already married. I can't marry you. And then he notices something's wrong and he runs away. And he later wakes up from his dream. And there's this little spider making a web above his head or like a man goes to see hospitality in a house and the young woman starts trying to like pawn her baby off on him. And he just chops first with his sword and ask questions later. And this is this is like samurai time. And he runs off and gets his buddies and they come back. And it was like an illusion. The house is run down. There's all these spider webs. There are like emaciated corpses that have been eaten by the spiders. And they find this Jorogumo cut in half. So he made the right decision with his chopping. And just last night, I had a dream like that. And then the second half of my dream was, in fact, that I had to find the Jorogumo and kill it with my bare hands. So that spooked me. But there are moments that you can have that I've sort of had and that it looks like Jacob has in a much better sense than I had for sure that, like, it seems normal, but there's something weird going on. And then the nature of your contention like shifts. And I've only ever seen that in a negative way. But I wonder about that in the positive sense, like with God and not with something like a creepy spider. Well, there's there's also the admonition in the Book of James, which is a very Hebrew book, you know, to to make sure you entertain strangers because others have entertained angels unawares. And so that's also in the tradition. In fact, I think it's more often in the Bible that they are. The Bible, the whole question of history and the not to use, you got to really be careful with this word hit and the the devils or the demonic. Now, Luther had a very active relationship, you know, with them. I knew Haitian pastors that would tell stories about, you know, basically, you know, spirits and demons coming and and they did smack them. And so. It's a good question. I wish I had better answers for you. Your question was, when did Jacob know? Well, I think when. The hip, you know, when he was crippled. And then, you know, in combination with the break of day, I mean, there's all these clues, the hip, then the break of day. Let me go for the day is breaking. Well, that's a that's that's that's strange. And I will not let you go unless you bless me. So clearly, by that point, Jacob's looking for something. And what's your name? And. You know, he said, Jacob, and the man said, you should no longer than a man renames him, which is obviously a an authoritative move. So and then the name that's given and then afterwards, then Jacob has, please tell me your name, which, you know, this is this isn't the book of Genesis. You know, this Exodus, of course, Israel will forget the name. And at the burning bush, the Lord gives them, gives them the name. Why is it that you ask me my name? You know, even just the question back, I mean, they're contending that way. And and then Jacob says, for I've seen the face of God and yet my life is preserved. The sun rose upon him. Another thing that just struck me, too, is that he if somebody grabs the hollow of your thigh. And you're immediately bait, you know, injured and lame in that in that area. It's one of those things that you might come to appreciate immediately that he didn't grab you somewhere just to smidge higher and emasculate you. And so that restraint shows this goodness, yet power. And so that might have been a tip off as well. And of course, that's a very and I don't mean just this physiologically, physiologically, it's a very sensitive area. I mean, this is the I mean, for the Hebrews, no tattoos, no cutting ears or nothing like that. Except circumcision, it's like, come on, can't we can't we just have tattoos instead? Wasn't there also like a covenant move where instead of like shaking hands, there was like a placing of the hand on the thigh as well? Yeah. And there's all these euphemisms in the Bible, too, you know, feet. You know, Ruth and Boaz, you know, uncover his feet. Oh, that's a well-known euphemism. But that's sort of size 12. That speaks to to, you know, we're doing things and we think we know in the moment what we're what we're up to, right? And then we find out sort of in hindsight, oh, something was drawing us along like we knew we somehow sensed that it was a spider and an illusion. Right. We somehow sensed that there was more going on here than we knew about. But we took it at face value at the time. Right. And then we we revised that right later on. That's actually a point I thought should have been brought up by Pigeot in the last part to their Vervecki conversation. Right. Because like and I think I mentioned this in one of my comments in one of your videos, Paul, right, where you've got this idea that that the the T loss is the thing drawing you forward and that there's a reverse cause. Right. There's a cause of where you're going, not a cause of where it started. Right. And that seems to be missing. I mean, I don't like dualism, but there is a dualism in formal cause and final cause. It's like, well, what if it's the final cause that's drawing you forward? You don't know it's drawing. You don't know why you're cutting, cutting the baby or the mother or whatever in half, but then you find out it was a spider. And I somehow I knew this. It was the T loss of doing the right thing as a samurai that caused me to make that cut rather than, you know, show too much empathy, for example, or even in this case, sympathy and and yeah, or even pity in that in in that instance. You know, we're forgoing all three of those things. We're going straight to use the sword because we're a samurai. And so there is that aspect of the T loss drawing you forward to what you know, not and it is revealed to you as a result of having done the action, it is not revealed to you before. Like there's this whole reversal of time thing going on that I think is super important and nobody talks about that's the emanation versus the emergence. My mind is linked with that whole thing. Yeah. Bear Bear got into that. The their time, in a sense, move moves forward with emergence, but time moves backward with emanation and, you know, I think. Again, we live in in such a controlled. Comfortable time that. For most of human history, people would have many occasions in life when immediate decision making was required for life and death. Soldiers have that, of course, and. You act and the revelation happens after the action. I remember Tim Keller was talking about, you know, pastor of a big church, people would come to him and say, oh, pastor, Tim, could you pray for me because I want I want to know the will of God for this decision right now, and Tim Keller's answer always surprised me. He always had the same answer. He's like, well, well, first, make a decision. And it's like, no, no, no, wait a minute. I want I want the answer before I make the decision. And it's like, no, first you have to make the decision and then you get the answer. Like, no, no, no, no, no. Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. And tied to the whole my grace is sufficient to you or for you. Yeah, I think so. I think it's also tied to. So there's there's this other great story, a Mother Teresa story where this American big wig goes to Mother Teresa and says, oh, Mother Teresa, would you pray for me? So what do you want me to pray for? And he says, I need clarity in this decision in his life. And she says, I'm not going to pray for that. What? What? No, that's not what you're supposed to say. She says, no, you're you're asking for clarity and that's not what you get. What you need, what you need is trust. What you need to do is trust. And so there's the wrestling. Yeah, there's the wrestling. Well, I think there's something in this idea of subversion to where I don't think we totally understand what blessing is and that I think anybody who's experienced great pain can recognize even within that. There is often a blessing to be found and depending on the way you orient yourself, sometimes it's greater than others. But I think for me, I just look at my life and the times where I've lost the most, where I've lost capacity of myself the most is where I've also gained the most in a. In a less obvious way, in a less material way. And I think that's something God is allowing us to do, too, is wrestle with this idea of what does it mean to be blessed and like, what what does that cost you and what's that exchange? Yeah, that reminds me of when when Abraham gets blessed by God and God's just like, oh, and you'll have all these descendants and they'll be slaves for 400 years and blah, blah, blah. And it's like, wait a minute, God, what's this blessing that you're giving me? Because he kind of does that. And it's like, well, I mean, he's not lying. Right. But like, there you go. That's the blessing. Yeah. Yeah. Abraham doesn't contend with blessing. Abraham and the blessing have a very people, people get upset when I talk this way because they jump to Hebrews and he's a he is a this is this is this is where the time thing is important because he is a hero of faith. But when you read Genesis, he is showing everything but faith until basically you get to the the trial with Isaac, take your son, your only son to a place that I will show you. But before that, you know, he's well, are you going to could you bless my servant? Could you bless Lot? Could you bless Ishmael? No, Sarah will have a son. And then, of course, all the way to that. And finally, when he receives that, take your son, your only son to a place that I will show you. Well, Tim Mackey had a really interesting sermon, not necessarily on this, but it was on Gideon. And he was sort of talking about the way we read Bible stories where you see Gideon testing the fleece and how many times have we gone like put our fleece out and he's like, but we're not reading the story in the whole because three times he asked God and he tests God. And what does God do back? He tests him back the same amount, three trials of weed out your army, weed out your army, weed out your army. And that's what I think we don't recognize. The more we test God and we wrestle and contend with him, he asks the same from us and it's what it costs. And so not everybody's blessing and wrestling is the same. But it's I don't know, there's this push and pull. And that makes sense in the Abraham story, where it's like time after time, him finding his way to make it. Work so that it becomes this prophecy and then it conimates to this ultimate test. And then subverted. And I mean, of course, the whole thing with that very, very difficult test, I mean, that's coming on the heels of an impossible pregnancy and birth. Which, I mean, a lot of times gets lost and I don't know. You know, I like bringing it back up because it's it's not inconsequential that they had, you know, Isaac when they're. 80 or something, 90, I don't know, late, whatever it was. And the first act of faith was Abraham leaving his home. Like he accepted the word like world, like, but you're going to have a son and he left his home. And so all of these mistakes in the middle. Yeah, they're like part of the story and they. But it's it's that step where like that led to tasting this thing hoped for. Some close friends of mine got married last year and she had serious problems with something like cystic fibrosis, like problems in her uterine. And like two years ago and then she was healed and then they were married. And now their first kid is on the way in June. Yes, that still happens. It was a miraculous healing and now a child. Yeah. And that's that that reminds me of another thing when we were talking about the dream imagery is and all these sorts of things and just the very basically the we're at least how I conceptualize it, we're speaking of the God of all creation for people that were literate, literate illiterate, like he is the God of all creation, not just the smart intellectuals and all that sort of stuff, not just the rich and the powerful. Yes. And so and so it kind of makes sense to a large extent that woven into the fabric of of reality and imagery, whether it be spiders or or an apparently barren womb becoming fruitful again, all these things are ways that speak to us beyond words that we can understand through basic observation in that God is accessible to everyone in one way or another, beyond language. But that that speaking through creation is a language to itself. We just don't appreciate it a lot of times. Well, I think there's something so true about even the miracles that we see in the Bible have so much meaning within the story. And they tell something significant about what's happening in these times and these places more than we recognize, it's not just about, oh, you know, you pour water and then it lights on fire. It's like, well, what was leading to that? What was it saying about that? There's and that's where I think this idea of symbolism and understanding that can really get you to a better place of understanding what's really happening in the biblical narrative outside of just this strictly material material sense of it and just like opens like it opens the door to so much more. It's the punctuation for the pattern, the contrast that helps you see the pattern is this punctuation of this, this material thing that is born to us in some sense, right, or unlikely to us or something we're not understanding in the moment or isn't understandable outside of the context and what it's doing to your point, Cassidy, I agree, is pointing back. How did we get here? What led up to the situation where materiality is doing something unexpected? For whatever reason, is it a blessing from God? Is it a visit from an angel? Is it just a mysterious circumstance? Is it a trial? What was it? Because that's the pattern. Those are the patterns that that persevere. Right. This is why that book is still there. Like, why would that book survive? Nassim Taleb talks about this most books just garbage. They're just gone. They should be pamphlets and then they should be nothing because they didn't contain much information. Funny, it's Ginger Bell was telling me his dad always told him never read anything from this century, only read something hundreds of years old because if it stayed that long, it's probably worth reading. Correct. Well, y'all, I got a I got a skedaddle, but you guys can keep talking. And for those of you watching on the live stream, if you want to participate in this conversation, the link is below. You can get onto the Discord and you can talk to these people. So great, great talk today, guys. And sorry, I have to leave, but my people are people are asking for me. So real world people. Thanks, Paul. We'll be watching Andrew with the banks conversation on the intimacy crisis soon, and I hope everybody else encourages you to do so every day to that channel, navigating patterns and watch all my videos and navigating patterns to great, great YouTube channels that no one's watching enough of. All right. OK, take care, people. Thank you. Bye bye. Bye bye.