https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=U-liJzoMvNY

 Definitely, definitely. There's nothing like a wire. It's just a lot less. So how have you been? I've been good. It's been a while. It hasn't been that long since we talked. Since our last one-on-one talk was about six months. Yeah, yeah, that was a while. But the last, the Chicago, the Chicago Meetup conversation, that was a fun one. Yes, that was fun. You guys have, let's see. We talked between your first and your second one. So you had another one in December, right? Yes. Okay, and how'd that go? It went well. Everyone who showed up to the first one showed up to the second Meetup. Wow. So that is at least some amount of success. We couldn't have done too badly the first time. No. And we had five more, I think. That sounds about right. People showed up for the second Meetup. Good. So things are going well. It's an interesting bunch of people, but that's exactly what one would hope for, I guess. Yeah, absolutely, absolutely. Well, I'm glad that's going well. You might have to, you're getting to the limit of one conversation, you'll probably have to split up into two conversations. Yeah, yeah, we discussed that. Over about 15 or so, it really starts to be a little bit too big. The space is big enough where we could split in half or something like that. Good. I'm so glad that the Wheaton CRC agreed to that. And I think it's just, I think it's very much within church's interest to facilitate these conversations. I think it's good for the church. And I think it's just a no brainer myself, but obviously not every church thinks that way. Yeah, well, I'm certainly thankful and grateful for Kyle and Wheaton CRC for hosting this. I can understand how it might feel like a little bit of a risk, but I agree with you that it seems like it's a great thing. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So what's on your mind for this conversation? What do you wanna talk about? You've got your own YouTube channel now and you're on with the randos and so. Kind of, I mean, I'll talk briefly about my YouTube channel. I won't be able to be investing in it the way some people are able to put out great, kind of well thought out, well prepared content. It's really just an excuse for me to get people to talk to me and for me to be able to share those when it happens. So I'll probably only be able to have one or two conversations a month or something like that. I do have a full time job and a full time family. So that makes it a little difficult, but we'll see what happens. Okay, okay. So what do you wanna talk about now? Sure, so let's see here. I loved your video, Why I'm Still a Christian, that you put out over the weekend. I think that was perhaps one of your very best videos that you've ever made. I found it very encouraging. I'm sure a lot of other people did too. So I don't have too much planned for this conversation. I wanna see where it goes, but I'll start with this question. So what is a Christian? Oh gosh. Well, I'll give you my shortest answer. It's someone who loves, someone who trusts Jesus more than they trust themselves. Great, okay. That's my short answer, because I think finally and fundamentally, it's, and this is why I like, oh hang on, I got a homeless person. I'm gonna pause the video here. All right, that's good. Sorry about that, that was Daniel and I wanna catch him when I can, so. No problem, it makes me feel even more grateful for the time that you're able to and willing to share. So thanks. So I came up with that, because finally I think the gospel, being a Christian, is about, it's about trusting Jesus. And we default to trusting ourselves. And I think it's, I think trusting ourselves is a bad idea. We're not that good, we're not that smart. So that's my shortest definition of what a Christian is. Great, well it seems like we're on the same page and now I'm out of things to talk about. Oh, okay, well we've talked about whatever. I have absolute confidence you and I can fill an hour. I don't have any question about that. I'm sure we can. So of course, from our last conversation, I feel like we only sort of skimmed the top of the layers that we could go into with that question from my story. So how does that fit into what a church is, with how a church is defined, who gets to be a member, who gets to be a leader, all of those sorts of things? Right, right. So I had someone left a really good comment on my Why Am I Still a Christian video? And the person basically said, Daniel's a Mormon, the homeless guy. I mean, he'll be a Mormon till the day he dies. That's how he's gonna be. The person left a comment that basically said something to the effect of, I was a Mormon and I was deceived and I was deceived for years by my church. And you and I would agree that, whatever Sam Harris's take is on Christianity, you and I, when we look at the Mormon belief system and the story of Joseph Smith and the tablets and the seeing stuff, I mean, all of this stuff, we look at that and we just say, you know, super skeptical about, you know, all of that and that's not ancient history in Joseph Smith's case. I mean, there's a lot of stuff there. So, okay, not a lot of respect for the Mormon faith in terms of how it's put together, so on and so forth. It's almost one of those things when you look at it, it makes you feel a little bit funny inside because if it like, I've been to Salt Lake City and you can go visit the Tabernacle. You can't go inside the main one, but they have the visitor center and stuff like that. And it's very interesting. And they take you through and they've got like exhibits, which are like, you know, every Christian's like, oh, I know what Bible story that is. I know what Bible story that is. Oh, wait a minute, what's Jesus doing talking to Native Americans? And so it's one of those things where it seems almost a little bit too transparent what happened there. And then it makes you feel a little bit like, well, did that happen to us too? And it's a little bit like, what did someone say? Was this Douglas Murray who said that recently where one of the things that caused him to lose faith in Christianity was when he studied Islam? Or did Tom Holland say that? I think it was Douglas Murray. Tom Holland had exactly the opposite experience, but right, that was Douglas Murray when he was talking to, you mentioned that when he was talking to Esther, right? And then he talks about that and you can Google that article and so I read it. And yeah, he studied Islam and at that point he says, he's given up on the story. So this commenter basically said, you know, I was deceived by the Mormon religion, by my Mormon church. And so I now, and then he took psychedelics, he had an experience which he believes connected him with God. And so he right now is in the position where he has a faith that is based on experience. And of course, Douglas, Doug Murray said, you know, I'll have to have, I'll have to see something. So he has this religion that- Right, hear something. I have this religion which is based on experience. And you know, that's enough for me. You know, these belief statements, you know, so he's gonna have a religion based on experience, you know, no belief statements. And- And probably fear of or distrust of institutions and that sort of stuff. Once you've been burned by one, I can- Absolutely. And, you know. And so, and in John Vervecky's project too, there's a sense of, although John, I think really tries to keep balance between his four Ps, that he understands that propositional truth has a place. And I agree with that, propositional truth has a place. Now, the difficulty that we have, I think, when we try to move across time and when we try to scale up in terms of community, I think propositional statements are indispensable for managing time and managing community, partly because even though our seeing and interpreting and understanding propositional statements is always, you know, conditioned and embedded within cultures, they are really useful tools for keeping continuity across time and for scaling groups up in community. And so for that reason, whereas I hear a lot of people want to say things like, well, the content of these propositions doesn't matter, it's the intentionality, so on and so forth. I don't think we can actually pull the four Ps. I think all of these four Ps are in a sense, in real life, they're all knit together. And we can't sort of say, okay, no more propositional belief. I don't think we can do that. And so the struggle- You need a proposition to do that. Exactly. And so we will always have these issues with us. And one of the tenets of Christianity, which goes right back to Jesus, is judge not that you be not judged. So, and when I read Jesus there, an English judge has a dual nature of condemning and discerning. And I think he's talking about condemning there. Now, if you read a book like First John, First John is a very black and white book. And that's just the nature of that book. And there's light and darkness, and the Joannean New Testament is full of that. I'm doing that- You're in, you're out. You're in, you're out. Truth, lie. And the thing is you always need that too. And so I think, I think propositional, the propositional aspect to the faith is indispensable, but we will always, we have to understand the limitations with which we always have in dealing with that aspect. That, you know, and you know, early on when I got to this church, we had a member of this congregation who had Down syndrome. He was an adult with a Down syndrome. And I wasn't around when he made his profession of faith, but in the church council, there were many stories about his profession of faith and just how heartfelt and sincere it was. Now, an adult, and this particular adult with Down syndrome, he was not capable of the careful propositional distinctions that you and I work on. When we're talking about theology, philosophy, he had no capacity for that. Right. But, and if you and I were, if he was in a room with you and I, and one of us were going to try to convince him of our position of the Trinity over the other, I would win because I was his pastor and you're not. I mean, the capacity to discern, you know, to do this propositional processing that you and I are capable of doesn't scale to him. Now, if we see these differentiations, we should probably also imagine that there are levels above us that we would be as the Down syndrome man is to us. We can easily imagine that. And so I think, you know, my decision to not join the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints because of my skepticism regarding it's a good many of, a good much of its theology, its belief structure, its history, all of that, I think propositional belief helps me with that. But there are limits to where that can take me. And I think as human beings, the question of trust is much closer to the core of what and who we are. Before we, before, you know, when you and I were infants, you know, trust is something we could, that trust was something that was us. We should participate in. Yes, love the word. We could participate in. And trust was something that we had a degree of volition about, but even that, I mean, we don't talk ourselves into trust. We'd have to work really hard to talk ourselves into trusting someone. Like in many ways, a lot of our beliefs are pre-volitional. We simply have them. And so, you know, I, and I know that answer probably doesn't satisfy some for some reasons, it doesn't satisfy other for other reasons, but I think that's as human beings, simply what we're capable of and expresses the limits of our capacity in many ways. And as a church that enfolds people with tremendous scale, there we are, you know, we have, we come to Jesus as children in many cases, and we grow into these, you know, creatures who are capable of other things, but probably towards the end of life, we revert in a sense back to, back to creatures who can trust and to whatever degree we have volition, that's where we go. And so that's why, well, what's a Christian? And that's why I say, I don't say someone who trusts God more than they trust themselves, even though again, I'm Trinitarian, so Jesus is God, but someone who trusts Jesus more than they trust themselves. So there's, that's about the best I can do, I think, at least what I'm capable of today. Sure, sure. Well, what do you think of that? Honestly, I agree with everything you just said, except there was one little last bit there. So I have a daughter who's like a year and a half, she reacts very differently if I hold her than if some strange guy off the street holds her, she already understands that, she knows what that trust is. So you talked about the need for propositions to scale both across time, across the size of a community, and across sort of what you might say, a developmental or an IQ spectrum, right? From children on up, people with cognitive disabilities to scholars, there's some united bundle that we're all sharing in. And that's true of people in the United States and true of people everywhere on planet Earth. That's true of people in 2020, still getting used to saying that, and it's true of people in 120, although perhaps not 2080. I suppose part of my complaint with the Trinity, if I'm honest, is that I don't think it scales super well on the up and down the IQ spectrum. And I would also say that I'm not sure how well it scales on the time spectrum. And I, let's see here, I'll start with the IQ, or to be less judgmental, to the developmental stage. So I think that most, part of my complaint with the Trinity is I don't think most evangelicals are actually very Trinitarian. At least not the ones that I've interacted with. I would agree with that. I think that for most people, the Trinity just boils down to Jesus is God somehow in some sense. And that often seems to get conflated with what you could maybe call modalism, where just God is one person and then Jesus is that person, which is not technically Trinitarian. And then you kind of see people who maybe go in the other direction, especially people who read the Bible a lot, who will just say there's God and God's son, Jesus, right? And no, they're the same somehow, but I don't really know how that works. Those seem to be kind of two directions, and some people seem to hold both of those things simultaneously in a weird sort of way. And that it doesn't seem like the Trinity is doing its job, at least for most people in modern day American evangelicalism from my experience, which is part of the reason why I think that I cause some problems. Well, why, what do you think the job of the Trinity is? All right, I'll say the job of Christology more broadly. I think that the job is really using sort of your language and kind of like the Bible project language, it's connecting heaven and earth. It's connecting like the normal everyday experience and the super normal. I'll avoid saying supernatural. It's like the numinous and whatever the opposite of the numinous is, it's how those two things hook up together. It's how normal everyday facts connect with sort of our religious symbolic interaction with the world. And that it's somehow sort of like transubstantiation is sort of like a mini version of this question, right? Like the question of, in what sense is the blood, is what sense is the bread and the wine, the blood and the body of Jesus Christ? What do we mean by is? Yep, yep. That's a very interesting, there's a lot going on in that word. The author of this book just had it sent to me from Baker and he and I are gonna have a conversation and where he's wrestling with Calvin's real presence with Roman Catholic transubstantiation. So I've got to dig into this book and the author and I are gonna have a conversation about it. Because no, you're exactly right. You're talking about sacramental, the sacramental nature of Christ. Yes, so like just finishing up on the sacramental nature of the Eucharist, like there's some part of us that knows that it's bread and wine. I'm not gonna say just bread and wine. There's some part of us that knows that that's what's happening and we connect that to just eating a normal meal. But there's some part of us that is hooking that up with all sorts of religious meaning and like this participatory sort of way of interacting with spirituality. And so what exactly is going on there? And that's sort of what the theology of sacraments is trying to get at. How do we make sense of that? How do we understand that to ourselves? How do we explain that? And then there's the question of are we just explaining it or is the way that we talk about it somehow also affecting the way that we experience it? Do we need some sort of theology of it, some sort of explanation of it in order for it to do its work? So that's sort of like a slightly less contentious, not completely less contentious, but sort of a microcosm. It's even bigger and on an even grander and more important scale when we talk about it. Who is Jesus? How do we think about him? Because clearly a Christian is thinking about Jesus in a religious sort of way in the same way that a Christian participating in the Eucharist is thinking about it and not just this is, oh, I'm having a little snack in church. This is different than the snack you might have after the service is done out in the lobby. There's something else going on there and there's something different from the way that I interact with and relate to this person, Jesus. Any other person. And that's at least part of what it means to be a Christian. So what in the heck is going on there? And that's what this question of Christology is. One could actually kind of say, Trinitarianism is actually something kind of up there at the level of above who Jesus is. It's sort of the interaction of those two things in that ontology and incarnational theology is the study of who Jesus is that's splitting hairs. So that is what it's supposed to be doing. That's what the Trinity is supposed to be doing. It's supposed to be hooking up our religious sense or senses divinitatis into who Jesus is, trying to understand how that works and somehow helping facilitate that process from working properly into working properly. This is really pushing the edge of how I'm able to talk about this. Well, I think that's one aspect of it. That's the aspect, that's I would say perhaps the pastoral aspect of the Trinity. I think there's another aspect of the Trinity which is also vital and which probably functions more in the realm of the church councils in which it was articulated in Nicaea, for example. And I'm not saying that these aspects are disconnected. I think they're actually deeply connected. But I mean, it's very clear if you look at the church's creeds that the doctrine of the Trinity was intended to function in a way that doesn't trip up the church in terms of how it connected up to the philosophy, especially of the first 500 years of the church in the Eastern Roman Empire and then scaling over to the West. That, you know, I was impressed. So this week I preached on John, last Sunday I preached on John one, the Sunday before I preached on Hebrews two. And I had never read Hebrews one and two and John one back to back like I had to just because of how these two weeks rolled out for me. But I was deeply impressed at what I saw. Now maybe I'm doing some projecting here, but what I saw as the, now the Holy Spirit wasn't fully present, so it might've been a little binitarian there. But the view of John and the view of Hebrews and how early I think those books are and how developed the understanding of Christology in both passages is. Quite clearly in both passages, Jesus, the world was made through him. And he was there from the beginning. And they seem to have no shyness of talking about Jesus as God. Now I think in some ways, when we talk about Christology, that seems to be the focus of our action because we imagine that the word God is sort of settled business. But I think part of what we're wrestling with today, and this is getting into my God one and God two, part of what we're wrestling with today is really what do we mean when we say God? And so the Trinity has Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. My conversation with Nathan Jacobs was very interesting because he kind of walked through, he's an expert in that, like I'm not, but he kind of walked through the church father's argument about why do we call them Father and Son? Because that's deeply strange too, far stranger than any of us let on because we're just simply so accustomed to it. And the relational dynamics between Father, Son, and then you've got Spirit. So yeah, Trinity's pretty, it's pretty high up there in terms of our capacity to conceptualize. But I think a lot of the reason the church dug in so much was that people smarter than I could see that any other formulary is going to trip us up. Because the difficulty that you have with Jesus then is, well then what is he? Because that clearly is the problem that the disciples have because he stills a storm and he rises from the dead. He forgives sins. He forgives sins. And the end of the gospel of Matthew, they worship him. And these are the things that we're struggling with. These are a bunch of Jews we're talking about here who have had polytheism beaten out of them by the entire Old Testament and Judges and all of those books. And they're living in a polytheistic world at the time too. And so I have a great amount of sympathy for people who I can on one hand, deeply appreciate the hesitancy with which they want to use the God word and also the difficulty at figuring out how this stuff fits together. Because even, so I go to Calvin seminary, we talk about the Trinity. I don't know after any of those lectures if it was any clearer to me after than it was before. I mean, there's a way in which this three in one is one plus one plus one equals one. And so, yeah. But at the same time, what to do with Jesus if Jesus is not in some very strange way, Yahweh, but at the same time that modalism is not going to cut it at other times such as let's say the crucifixion. So this is really hard stuff. I'll agree with that. So man, there's so many different ways I could go with that. So I think I will pass on doing a word for word parsing of John one and Hebrews one. But I'll just say that I slightly disagree with your conclusions. Okay. But I do think, so one of the things that we talked about last time was Alistair McGrath's book, Heresy. Yeah. Right, you mentioned it, I haven't read it at our last conversation. I've read it since then on your book. So you've read it more recently than I have. Because I read it 10, 12, 13, 14, 15 years ago. Quite a while ago. So I finished it maybe two months ago or something like that. So Alistair McGrath, a preeminent Christian intellectual and historian and scientist. Although not quite a very sharp edge conversation partner for Brett, but a really nice guy and a really smart guy wrote a book about heresy. And he was trying to determine what the essence of heresy is. And I, in many ways, liked the book. In many ways, didn't entirely like the book. I appreciated his openness and his kind of inquisitiveness and his unwillingness to jump to too easy of conclusions. Right, is heresy anytime someone invents a new idea? Well, no, because you can trace the development of lots of doctrines and some of them do seem like new ideas or at least new-ish ideas. So it's not just new ideas. So we can't use that rule. Obviously, a lot of heresies are new ideas, but not all of them. Are they ideas that come from outside the church into the church? Well, that rule doesn't seem to work very well either. Are they things that come from inside the church when someone is overreacting against their culture? Sometimes yes. Anyway, he goes through like six or even more possible kind of definitions like that and doesn't find satisfaction with any of them. So I appreciate that sort of thing because one could easily make too simple of a story, those sorts of things. My criticism would be that he, it's almost like I would say his book Heresy is to explaining orthodoxy as Steven Pinker's Enlightenment Now is to explaining Enlightenment Humanism. That's interesting. It's a little bit easy to tell the story that favors exactly where history ended up with you and to attribute all the things that are good to you or what you are now and to attribute all the things that are bad to not what you are now. That seems to be Steven Pinker's Mistake in Enlightenment Now, about the Enlightenment that never mentions the French Revolution and all those sorts of things. And it's just wonderful how history has culminated in Steven Pinker. It's too easy to do that sometimes when you're trying to build something of a story about the purpose or goal of history. It always seems to be yourself. And Hegel did a similar thing. It's an easy temptation. And it seemed a little bit like Alice Sturmegraaff was like, oh, you shouldn't rebel against the church. But the Protestant Reformation, they were right to rebel against the church. Every single rule seems to have its exception and it's always the exception that led to him. You should read his other book, Luther's Dangerous Idea about the Protestant Reformation. I should read that. Also a very interesting book. I had been familiar with Alistair. Back when I was having evolution creation crisis, he was helpful in that sort of thing because he talked a lot about the relationship between science and faith. So I was preloaded to like Alistair McGrath. And then I read that book and was like, you know, if you could see this through my eyes, Alistair, I'm not sure you would have written it this way. And so, but the thing is, is that, so you make an argument that's almost better than any that he makes in the book, although you think that you got it from his book, but I think that you've kind of thought of it yourself after reading it, that there's something like, and this is something that honestly, Brett Weinstein would agree more with, is that it's sort of like there's a quasi-evolutionary history that helps sort out true doctrines, false doctrines. And Brett sort of said something like that to Sam, like Sam Harris, not Sam T. Ooh, I almost said my last name. That Christianity, even though the book stays the same unless you count more, we already sort of dealt with Mormonism earlier, that the book stays the same, but the interpretation and the enactment and all of those things change. And that's something like the, what do you call it? The epigenetic diversity or something like that. I use the epigenetic thing for the Bible. And that's, Brett hasn't had enough time with me yet. He may have said phenotypic diversity or whatever. Yeah, I don't know enough biology to, I just learned my biology from PBS. Right, well, you should talk to Brett sometime. I'm sure that you- That would be fun. That would be fantastic. I hope that happens. So obviously your side seems to have won if we use that measure, right? The trinity, depending on how you define Christian, is probably believed by upwards of 90 or 95% of Christians, apparently. The biggest exception would be like oneness Pentecostals. Those are just outright self-confessed modalists, but at least they're honest with it. And obviously there was competition within the Roman Empire, especially in the first half of the fourth century, right? Constantine becomes emperor, persecution ended, right? The Diocletian persecution right up until, you know, until Constantine's time was about the worst it ever was. So, right, things got really, really bad in like 290, and then, you know, just two decades later, all of it's over. And the emperor himself is Christian or something close to Christian. Aryan-ish. Well, Constantine's an interesting guy. He doesn't want to be put in a bucket. He didn't get baptized until his death bed, and I think that that says something about him. Right? I'll be a Christian just not yet. Yeah. I have some things I need to do first. To Corinth, he's into that 2 Corinthian thing. I know. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. So, I was- I evoked the name. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Sorry. So there was, that's okay. So there was something like a fair battle among competing Christologies. There was Athenationism. It wasn't even called Trinitarianism there, and one could argue whether or not even Athanasius was a Trinitarian. He was certainly a Binitarian. What he did with the Holy Spirit is more of an interesting question. By the way, there was Athenationism. The father and the son are equalism, homo- homo-oceanism. There was Arianism. The father and the son are similar, but not equal substances, and then there was a couple other small competing groups, one of which I would have agreed with, but they didn't fare so well in that competition. So, it's like, how are we to interpret that, right? Is that the- Is that something like the judgment or decision or blessing of God acting in history? Is it something like the, whatever the ramifications are of these different, differences in Christology are in real life? And I'm not sure how many of the differences actually ripple down to real life, if I'm honest, but let's imagine that some of them do. Was that something like a way for us to decide which one is heresy and which one isn't, instead of just saying, well, he says the definition of heresy is the other guys, and the other guys said the definition of heresy is those guys, and then she said, he said, she said, situation. How do we get out of that, he said, she said situation, and is something like the judgment of history a way of doing so? And is that really what you're trying to say? Well, I, in defense of my promotion of Alistair McGrath, I will say that I, whether or not he holds to it in the book, I will say that I do, what I do usually is I will read this, I will read this quote from the book. So what is heresy? Heresy is best seen as a form of Christian belief that more by accident than design, ultimately ends up ultimately subverting, destabilizing, and even destroying the core of the Christian faith. I think that's a really powerful, I think that's a really powerful definition of heresy. Sure. And I guess. What if one branch of Christianity was destroyed by a different branch of Christianity? Well, okay, so now we'll get into the difficulties of an evolutionary approach. Now, I would have to say that, listen, me making this argument on YouTube in the context of Jordan Peterson and the IDW is not accidental. Because in this context, remember Jordan Peterson's, Jordan Peterson's truth is Darwinian truth. Yeah. And so I find this to be a very helpful definition of heresy in that context. I find this to be a very helpful definition of heresy in talking about Brett Weinstein and Sam Harris, both of whom have a, both of whom privilege Darwinian, not only Darwin, but Darwinian modes of thinking. And so that's part of the reason I forefront this definition of heresy in this context. Sure. It doesn't rest on Christian presuppositions or exclusively Christian presuppositions. Right. And many will know that by virtue likely of my education and formation within the Dutch Calvinist tradition, I operate as a rather pragmatic presuppositionalist apologist in many ways. I'm not so much like a foundationalist, rationalist apologist like many others are. That's not my style. And it's not my style by virtue of the context in which I've grown up and been formed. Now our capacity, you know, it's no, to give the sociology of knowledge and religion it's due, you know, it's no surprise that you who grew up in a evangelical Unitarian church should be holding forth on these positions. And it's no surprise that I who grew up in a Dutch Calvinist church should hold forth and on these positions. And, you know, the probably something that both of us would share by virtue of the traditions in which we've been embedded is that we would argue that questions that divide us such as the nature of Christ and the truth of the Trinity should best be adjudicated on the basis of scripture. And then we sort of sneak reason in, which is again, very Protestant of us. That we look at the various biblical texts and we try to align them and see what makes the most sense. And then we also do a fair amount of pragmatic looking about as we have in this conversation and saying pastorally, we should see which ones fit. And we're both doing that. And just as going all the way back earlier in this conversation, we use the capacities that we have to make the judgments that we're capable of. Now, could it be that 500 years from now, if the Lord tarries, if we don't destroy the world by some idiocy of human corruption, that another doctrine of the church found in the Bible begins to reign supreme and is seen as essential that you and I simply haven't by virtue of our history had the ability to discern. That seems reasonable. Right now the church is fighting over sexual mores and process theology, open theism, these kinds of things. Heresies, I liked Alistair's book partly because I think in many ways orthodoxy and heresy sort of co-form. As, I think you said it very well, as ideas either emerge or flower or come in, whatever direction, as ideas come up that the church has to wrestle with in a way consensus develops over great periods of time. And what I think we will see, not unlike we saw we're seeing with, let's say the Seventh-day Adventists. The Seventh-day Adventists used to be theologically further outside the camp than they are now. I suspect that two, 300 years from now, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will likely migrate closer. So Richard Mao's been having conversations with scholars at Brigham Young and Richard Mao takes a lot of heat for that. But I think he's doing so. How do you spell his last name? I searched for him one time back in the finding. M-O-U-W, it's a Dutch name. M-O-U-W. Richard Mao was professor of, I actually had a course with him at my intro to philosophy course with him at Calvin College and then he went on to Fuller and became president of Fuller Seminary. Since retired and whenever there's some big CRC shindig, they trot out Richard Mao because he gives a great speech. And he does, he's a terribly, and he's a wonderful speaker and a wonderful man and a wonderful Christian. And one of these intellects that can really scale because he can talk to regular folks and he can do philosophy and theology at a very high level. And he's been in conversation with the Mormon Church and with scholars kind of quietly. And I think over the process of time, the defects of Mormon theology will become evident to the degree that the church itself increasingly abandons them just as that church, and the Mormon Church is interesting because of their theology of prophecy, that church can change like this. They've already changed a lot. It's changed a lot. And even in the last 20, 30, 40 years, they've changed tremendously. And so Alistair McGrath's Darwinian perspective on heresy, I think is a really helpful one for today. But it has the same problem that all of us have who are travelers through time, is that here in 2020, we're looking back on history and making judgments about winners and losers. And we don't get to see the future. Exactly, we don't get to see the future. And that's just a liability of where we're at, but it's analogous to the liability that I speak to you having been formed by Dutch Calvinists and you speak to me having been formed by biblical Unitarians. And so I think, you know, when we play the monarchical vision card, we usually step back, but step back insufficiently because I can't help but step back and view the world through my Dutch Calvinist formation. And obviously the monarchical vision shouldn't have that lens on, but it's the only, and that's what makes this fictitious clean room fictitious because it's something I can't, it's like the ring, I can't wield it. You can only take so many lenses off before you start taking off your own eyes. Exactly. And that's where, you know, one of the question of heresy is one of these kinds of things, just like we started talking about where I've gotta, at some point, I've gotta make a stand at some place and I've gotta do my best to defend it. But the truth is anybody looking at me would say, you don't arrive at this purely through rational arguments based on what you find in scripture. You've been formed in a specific tradition and I have to say, yep, guilty, can't help it because I'm a human being. And- But you too, whoever just said that. Exactly, I mean, I can't talk to another human being and have that not be true for them. And we all have that. So we do the best we can. And so, you know, I'm so grateful that you came into this crazy little community that we all have going because, you know, your presence, and this is where, again, I like Alistair's thing and I like the fact that, you know, I don't have to like John Calvin burn you at the stake like Michael Servetus. I love you. I'm gonna bring him up. I'm gonna bring him up. I'm gonna bring him up. Although you're far, I have the sense that you're a far more social person than Servetus was. He seemed to go around Europe sticking his finger in everybody's eye. But- Yeah, but- He was a gadfly. Yeah, but you know, what you do in our community with Mary and Job, you ask uncomfortable questions. Otherwise, just like in all of these churches that you visited, well, nobody's gonna, nobody's gonna talk about the Trinity because, and then you show up and, yeah, that Trinity thing, I don't believe that. And pastors are like, oh gosh, you know, what am I gonna do now? I gotta go back and haul these books out. I haven't read since seminary and homo usius and, you know, but you're keeping the tradition alive on both sides. And so in some, and, you know, may the author of 1 John forgive me, you know, heresy itself has an important part to play in the life of the church. And because it helps the church learn and grow. And so I think, you know, when I get back to, okay, what is a Christian? Christians are people used by God and heretics are used too. And most heretics are Christians. Because, you know, and this is where the dynamics of sort of you coming into the community were very interesting because in a sense, Christians would put on their missiological hat and, you know, all manner of atheists and skeptic are just totally welcomed with open arms and a non-trinitarian comes in the midst and the knives come out. It's like, whoa, wait a minute here. You know, but that's a natural thing too. So I don't know. God is a terribly crafty writer of history. And I think it's, I don't know. I think it's cool. Well, thanks. So now I really do appreciate you saying that. But the question is, is what should I do? Right? What assuming a short of me magically changing my mind and whether that's even within my power that's pre-volutional or not, we'll leave that aside. What would you recommend that I do? So I'll say a little bit more before I'll let you answer that. I, you know, I've been wondering, so why in the world would I come here and talk to you on your YouTube channel in a way that'll get seen by a couple thousand people? What kind of crazy, you know, what's the word for people who look at themselves in the mirror too much like Donald Trump? Oh, you evoked them by name. Narcissist, sorry. You know, what kind of full of himself narcissist would even do this sort of thing? And I suppose part of it is really, I know that where I'm at now is not a safe place to stop in the process of my theological development and in the process of my life choices related to churches and all those sorts of things. For anyone who's still watching, you know, I go to a Trinitarian church, but I'm not myself Trinitarian. You might've picked up on that. So it's okay for now. And it's fine and good in some ways, but there's a lot of difficulties presently and things that I can anticipate in the future. Like for example, my pastor a couple of weeks ago said something like, oh, everyone should, who can should stick around after church. There's gonna be an important announcement. I'm like, oh no, he's gonna leave. And then if he leaves, then what happens to me? The next pastor comes in and then I'm at the mercy of his judgment. Oh my goodness, oh my goodness. And it turned out that they were gonna vote on replacing the air conditioner. But you know, the thought process went through my head and I was like, I am very dependent on the particular mercies and circumstance of this one individual pastor. And he's much older than me and I'm extremely grateful for him now, but this is not a situation that will last forever. That's just one of the many questions, right? My daughter's growing up. Right now she can speak one word sentences, pretty soon maybe two word sentences. So it's not really a question yet. But how many times do I want to have the post sermon debrief where I'm like, okay, pastor said this, this and this, that we understand it actually more like this, this and this and et cetera, right? And then there's the question of me just not being able to really be my full self either and having to intentionally self-censor. And in some respect, we always have to do that to belong to a community. But I have to do it at a pretty high and uncomfortable level a lot of the time. So with all that being said, I appreciate what you're saying about heretics and us having a role to play, but what would you say that I do in my own life? We started out this conversation talking about trust. And we noted how your daughter, if you hold your daughter, she trusts you. If I would walk, if I would meet you and your wife and your daughter and hang out there, all of the signals that your daughter would pick up about me would be, he's a trustworthy guy. They're talking to him, everything's good. I love kids. I reach over to pick up your daughter and your daughter looks at me and I don't trust him. That's pre-velitional. My guess is that in many ways, and my beliefs are like this, and I'm extrapolating from my experience to yours, when you at great cost and fear and trembling admit to a pastor that you're not a Trinitarian, you are doing so because this belief is in many ways pre-velitional for you. It's very complicated. And our grasp on how we hold these things is we really don't know. This is the stuff that John Verbeke does 50 hours on of all kinds of things all over the, we don't know this stuff. I think you're doing what you should be doing. And obviously, and sitting here talking to, embedded in a whole group of Trinitarians on the Discord server and all of these new friends is probably doing nothing for your biblical Unitarianism. But then again, this is part of what it means to be a minority. And then there are other mechanisms that well up in there in terms of your identity and how you've been. I don't see your challenge as a whole lot different from many of the rest of us and some of the little theological oddities that we might hold that may or may not meet with great resistance. How many people are in conservative churches that think that gay marriage is just okay? How many people are in mainline churches flying rainbow flags that think, I don't think this gay marriage is good. I mean, our lives are full of these things. Now obviously in terms of the Christian tree the Trinity is a pretty deep down one, but we both acknowledge that it may be a deep one, but in terms of how it plays in the pastoral lives of people, that's by no means simple. And so I think, from both of our conversations, actually all three of our conversations, but the one we didn't share because the volume was too low, I think you're doing what you should be doing. You are being faithful, you're being a faithful Christian and a faithful Protestant Christian in studying this stuff and wrestling with it. And I wouldn't want you to do anything different. I live in 2020 and I wouldn't put you on a rack and try to eke out a Trinitarian confession out of your mouth by way of torture. Now that gets into a whole bunch of other interesting sacramental questions too, because to what degree, all this stuff gets terribly complicated, but I deeply appreciate the sincerity, not only appreciate, but respect the seriousness with which you're taking this. And you rightly observed that the vast majority of Christians don't take hardly anything else anywhere near as seriously as you take this. And part of the irony of this means that you are also taking a whole lot of the rest of your confession, which is in line with the churches that you attend, probably more seriously than the people who don't take much of it seriously because you are a heretic. So, I think you're doing the right thing and you have to keep listening to your conscience and see what happens in terms of what you really believe. I mean, I have these issues, my stakes are higher. There was someone recently that was, part of the reason I really try not to get mired up in the Calvinist-Arminian dispute is because sometimes it's just really a pointless argument between people. Yeah, there are important things down there that are worth looking at. Well, by nature of your story, you have to look at some things that most of us aren't looking at. And I have seen nothing in how you approach it that says you are in any way insincere or not going about it in the right way. Now, how this shakes out for you, because the truth is, your daughter's young. If the worst your daughter runs into according to the evangelical churches you attend is that she has an insufficient view of the Trinity, given the range of options that we've been seeing in the church, there are worse things. So- Not everyone thinks that. That's really the thing. Some people think that this is a matter of eternal life and death. Or well, that brings up annihilationism. Eternal life or damnation. And people tell me that. I'm not ready to take that off the table. Fair enough. But what isn't a matter of eternal damnation in terms of the minutia of our life? And this is part of my complaint about how we as Americans approach the question of eternal damnation. So, I think quite frankly, frankly, if you're really serious about your daughter not being a Trinitarian, you'd have to make some awfully difficult question, you'd have to make some awfully difficult determinations about your family's church life. Because odds are, no matter, and this saying something to you as a parent of now young adults, odds are all the little stipulations you give your daughter trying correcting the pastor will likely not simply have the effect of just tinkering with this tiny little minutia in her perspective. Probably the bigger messages she gets from you are, don't trust the pastor. Because that's the resolution at which a child is operating. Right. And it's- We're kind of on board, but we're not completely on board with this thing. Exactly. And then that, yeah. And that leads to all- What does that imply? Where does that go? It could have the effect of having parents of different faiths where the kid basically comes up and says, I'm not gonna go anywhere near Christianity because I can't decide if it's three in one or if it's some other structure. It could have that effect. And so in a sense, there's no easy answers here, Trinitarian or non-Trinitarian. And that's why I as a Calvinist continue to maintain that salvation is of the Lord. He is the final judge. And it's the work of the Holy Spirit that finally brings faith into us. And so, this stuff is hard. And there's no easy answer to your solution or to the dilemmas that you face. And so I do see you pursuing them in a very respectful and appropriate and a Christian way. Well, thanks. But that doesn't give you an answer that says, here's what you should do. But I look at people who are fully Trinitarian, no matter how unsophisticated their knowledge of the Trinity is, they've got all those same dilemmas too. The Christian Reformed Church has done very well in many ways of delivering faith or what looks like faith to their children through catechesis and all of these things. And in the last number of generations, the Christian Reformed Church kind of has lost a lot of its mojo in those areas. But I don't know, Sam. And this is where again, I think God is the one that is directing your steps. Yeah. And I'll tell you as a parent of adult children, you have no idea what's coming down the pike in the next 12 to 15 years in terms of your daughter's life, in terms of your marriage, in terms of your life. I mean, three years ago, you and I probably wouldn't have been talking just because we're in Chicago and you probably wouldn't have stepped into a Christian Reformed Church, at least not one like this one. But here we are. Here we are. I don't know if that helps. It does help. No, no, it always helps. So I wasn't expecting you to wave a magic PBK wand and fix all of my questions and problems. You don't have control over my presuppositions any more than I do. Any more than I have over mine in many ways. That's true. Yeah. So I guess the question is, how does doctrine connect down to, or how does, you Calvinists have a pretty long list of things that you believe, and then you also say that it's not in our control and it's the Holy Spirit that does those sorts of things. I don't totally get how those two things jive together. Someone left a comment after my video about Sam and Brett and said, wait a minute, you're a Calvinist. Basically, he said, he didn't use these words, but basically you're just as compatible as Sam Harris. And he's got a point because it is a strange thing that the Christian Reformed Church seriously majored as a Dutch immigrant denomination, seriously majored obsessively in delivering its particular brand of Dutch Calvinism to its youth. Christian day schools. I mean, the CRC had, we practiced the Benedict option long before Rod Rear came along. Yeah, at the same time, having this doctrinal position that says, finally, it's the Holy Spirit, and the Holy Spirit blows where it wants to. And in terms of looking at the church, I have to agree with both. You do want to do all you can in terms of forming your children, but you have to do so wisely because sometimes it's the controlling mother that breeds the rebels. And there are all these dynamics going on. And so finally, our doctrinal statement says, you know what, in the final analysis, this is the sovereignty of God at work in ways we can't understand. And the more I learn about the world, the more I see I don't know. And so to be formed by a tradition that allows me to rest finally in God's work rather than my own is a source of great comfort, which pastorally is what it's supposed to deliver in us. That's my favorite part of Calvinism too. And it's, you know, so you were raised in a biblical Unitarian church, and you're a faithful son of your church, and you're in a minority position where, not too many folks are around, you can find them on the internet, but laying hands on one in Sacramento might take some effort for me. Unlike how many other, unlike Mormons, I can find Mormons all over the place. So what does that do to my definition of heresy? Well- Right, they seem to be reproducing just fine. Yeah, they are. But, you know, I was, so I was reading, you know, the first part of Tom Holland's Dominion, watching how he's treating the Donatists, you know. Look at those, and look at a controversy like the Donatist controversy. You know, you could really see why that thing gets going like it did, and why lots of people would say, I ain't gonna go to any church with any priest that, you know, that caved under persecution when staying faithful cost me and my group so much. Yeah, I can get that. Yeah, the traitors, literally the people who gave over the books. We still use that word, and it's from the Donatists. That's right. And yet the church had to find its way out of that. And so I, whether or not Alistair could maintain his definition of heresy through his book, what I find there on page 11, because when I read the book, I, you know, bang, that's what stuck with me in the book. And I thought, that's a good definition because, boy, it's hard to know. We're such small creatures. We're such bad thinkers. We really are, we're terrible at it. Well, then to the extent that you know, why do you think it is that the Trinity is indispensable in preventing a church from doing the things that are in that sentence written by Alice Sturmegrath? I don't remember what it says. Because I think that Trinity affords, even though it's, you know, to rationally take it apart and explain it, I think it affords a beautiful symmetry and balance that helps us both be joined to Christ as brothers and yet not imagine ourselves as Christ in an inappropriate way. The answer is that you do not get that. That might await us when Jesus and that, got People K Veterans Award to present and present theirself as GRF I think the Trinity, it's interesting that there's a conceptual symmetry and beauty to it, which continues to really resist explanation. And to me, that's a point in its favor, ironically. So I think there are reasons why the Trinitarian position won out, you know, 2000 years from now, maybe, you know, they'll all be Aryans, I don't know. But I'm comfortable with the position that was handed to me by my parents. Okay, that was a pretty good answer. Like that, I find that- I can't convince you, but. I'm listening. I don't find the resistance to explanation as beautiful as you do. But I hear what you're saying. You've studied it more than I have. I mean, frankly, you have. You've had to. I have had to. I'm not claiming to know more about it than someone who feels it from the inside, though. Well, there's another aspect of these conversations. You know, and we bump into that one all the time. Right. And so- Sometimes I do think that this isn't a question that seemingly the Bible itself- Ooh, I'm gonna be careful here. This, backing up, this doesn't seem to be something that we can throw the Bible at each other to answer. That doesn't seem to work. I've seen lots of people try to do that in both directions. And that doesn't seemingly accomplish anything that either side expects it to. It really does seem something at the level of presuppositions and the lenses that you read things through. And it's hard to know how to argue which lens you should be reading something through in the first place. One could say it seems to congrue better or something like that, but that seems to be about the best that you can do. It's weird how that works. Well, and now we're bumping up against the edge of Protestantism. And there are a number of issues like that. Yes. I was having a conversation with someone here in my office the other day. And I look at the options afforded me by Catholicism, let's say, with respect to this. And I'm not ready to trust the church hierarchy with that either. And so we remain in our seats and in our traditions with the rough edges and limitations that they have and the trade-offs that they possess. So, I mean, even in my circles, we would usually say, well, the doctrine of the Trinity is found in scripture in solution. In other words, the building blocks are there to have it emerge. And so in a confessionalist tradition like mine, we, you know, confessionalism, my understanding of confessionalism is that what it affords is for us to put our cards on the table and to say, you know, here are my presuppositions. Here is what I believe. And this is the best I can do as a human being who is, you know, I'm part of the river of history too. And I had specific parents born in a specific place and all of that comes with me. And again, that's why I'm comfortable in my Calvinist stream because I look at this and say, finally, it is only God that can judge because no one else can do the math in terms of, you know, I was watching, what was I watching today? But, you know, we human, oh, it was, it was a, I retweeted it. Someone had sent, you know, someone at the Golden Globes, this woman was talking, you know, talking about how, you know, without the right to choose, so she had aborted her first baby, she couldn't have, you know, had won her Golden Globe and now pregnant with her second baby. And it's like, you know, because this was part of my body that I didn't have choice over. And I thought, what part of your body do you have choice over? I don't know what it's like to be her, but I gotta wake up, I gotta sleep, I gotta pee, I gotta poop, I gotta eat, you know, cancer comes, puberty comes, growth comes, aging comes, I lose my hair. I didn't have choice about any of this. My body doesn't stop and say, how do you feel about this? No, my body feels. And so then who am I? I mean, it's a crazy complicated world and we're so glib about so many things. I can't even call God a being after listening to the Vervecki Heidegger stuff and trying to figure out all this stuff. But you know, only God can judge us. And again, by virtue of Jesus being God and what we saw in him, despite all of the incredible reasons that we've been through, and I can't even call him, despite all of the incredible reasons to be anxious in this world, I can, I think, responsibly say that God is good and he can be trusted to do with us, whatever we are, what is finally right and good. And with all of this stuff. And so that's, to me, that's a tremendously happy time and a happy place to be. Sure. And I think that's what a lot of Trinitarians finally mean when they say Jesus is God, is that he is the one in whom ultimate trust can be placed. And that when they hear me saying that I don't think Jesus is God, they hear me saying the converse of that when that's not what I'm saying. So I think I see your point. And there is some weird part of us that does kind of know what we think. We know when something doesn't ring true to ourselves. We know when we're lying. We don't know the whole truth, right? Like Sam Harris thinks that we should not lie by fully describing everything perfectly all the time, which is ridiculous. But we know when we're lying and we know seemingly when something doesn't congrue with us when we're talking about what we think and what we believe, even if it's purely just descriptive, and I don't think it's just descriptive either. I do think there's some arrow in the other direction. I do think propositions have some amount of effective force to them on us. I don't think it's purely that we're just looking at our belly buttons and be like, oh, I think I believe this and I think I believe that. It's not that either. So I don't have this all worked out. This is weird. The more we learn, the more we realize, we don't know. And to not be relativists or skeptics, fully skeptics, but we're just little creatures. We really are. Well, this has been wonderful, Sam. Do I have permission to post this? This has been great. Yes, yes, we did not talk about my in-laws. So we're really permission to post this. But this is, and you know, this, a conversation like this to me is worth so much. Yeah, amen. And I think it's so profitable. And I want to, I want the church to be able to host these conversations. And I think this helps people who are afraid of the church see that maybe there is hope that people can honestly engage what has been formed in them that they're not necessarily choose to believe. And maybe we can find community in conversation. Maybe we can learn a few things. And maybe these conversations can be productive and helpful pieces of our further formation. So, and I think, you know, the Discord server, the conversations that we've had, the meetups, this is, these are all in the service of that dream. Yeah, although I can say it's kind of rare and hard to find and one has to look for it. Yeah. I've gotten way more porcupine quills than I have gotten, you know, warm braces. Yeah. But so it goes. So it goes. Well, I am going to, I might go, might have a little date night with my wife. She had her first day back teaching school and first day back is always a hard day. Oh, yeah, yeah, I'm sure. I was back at work today too. Well, it's great talking to you, Sam. And again, I've, you know, just reading you on the Discord and watching you in the other conversations. I've, you know, I've really grown to respect you and to appreciate your participation in this community. And I just really want to see the best for you and your wife and your daughter. And I hope you're, I'm glad, I'm glad you're in a church that, where there's a pastor that you very much don't want to hear that he's leaving. Yes, that's very true. Well, thank you so much. And our interruption earlier made me really appreciate how precious your time is. And so I almost feel selfish and guilty for taking any of it at all. So I'm very, very grateful to have this conversation. Daniel doesn't feel any compulsion about taking my time. He's just doing his thing. All right, Sam, have a good evening. All right, you too. Bye-bye. Bye.