https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=n1K2jgr6ZSY

 Well, Jacob, I'm trying to figure out how this works. Rick sent me a message yesterday after my little stream and said, oh, you should do more short things. And he's right, I should. Part of the reason I haven't done a lot of short things is because I don't feel confident doing a number of short things until I think I have some things that are helpful. So one of the things that I thought about for a short thing was in fact, Jordan Peterson at the Cambridge Union and how he sounded so much like C.S. Lewis. So one of the tricks that used to, the guards used to play in Auschwitz was they'd get these people after this brutal transport to pick up like a hundred pound sack of wet salt and carry it from one side of the compound to the other and back and compound, that's not like an area this size. Those places were small cities. They had 50,000 people in some of the camps. So it was a walk across town after you'd been separated from your family and just about froze to death and were three quarters dead and had everything stripped away. It's like, just who the hell did you have to be to then subject that person to work for no other reason than to prolong their suffering, right? Because Solzhenitsyn said, you know, when he was in the camps, that at least if he was laying bricks in a wall or a brick layer was doing so, at least he had the satisfaction of building something, right, there was something, there was some tiny iota of meaning in the work, something redemptive in that, that crumb that you could feast on in the midst of your starvation. But whoever came up with this particular torment figured out how to make work itself counterproductive, right, work itself nothing but a means to more suffering. And you remember the joke on the outside of the Auschwitz camp, arbeit mech free, as my German is terrible, work will set you free. Someone made a joke about that. I wanted to think about it. Just exactly what would you have to be like to make that joke? And part of the reason I wanted to figure that out is because I'm a human being and a human being made that joke and a human being forced that punishment onto someone who was already suffering. And I wanted to figure out what you would have to be like, what I would have to be like to do that. I thought if I could figure that out, then I could figure out what the opposite of that was, right, because maybe such things should be brought to a halt. That's what we were supposed to remember from the concentration camps, which we're continually reminded never to forget as well. You do not remember what you cannot understand. And so we think, well, evil people did this, and hey man, fair enough, you know, but don't be so sure that those people aren't you. And so that's a horrible thing to contemplate, but a necessary thing to contemplate, and I would say also that if you don't contemplate it, you end up placing that great evil somewhere else, right, in some other person, in some other race, in some other political party, that's going somewhere. And if it's not part of your own heart and the fight isn't there, well, you're gonna have the fight somewhere. So, I thought about that for a long time, and then what I concluded was that the way out of that is to make better people at the individual level. It's a psychological issue fundamentally, not a sociological issue, not an economic issue, certainly not an economic issue, not a political issue. It is all those things to some degree, not fundamentally. There's no political reason to have some suffering person under your dominion carry a sack of wet salt that weighs 100 pounds from one side of a compound to another. No, no, that's you, man, corrupt, great to hell. And so, you know, you think that's pretty terrible, and it is pretty terrible, but there is one advantage to specifying evil in a very distinctive and precise manner is that when you specify something that precisely, you also specify its opposite, right? Now, if there's evil of that depth, then, well, there, at least in principle, might be the opposite of that, which would be the force that might resist it. And so, while I was looking into the heart of darkness, let's say, the light started to shine through, and, you know, that's partly when I started to understand, it was a little bit before that, that you should not lie. That's a big mistake. You think you can, first of all, I'll tell you one thing, that I never saw any of my clinical clients ever get away with anything ever. You know, we track their misery back to its origination point, and sometimes it was a mistake on their part, often a moral error, which they knew was a moral error when they were committing it, but may have forgotten about afterwards, so became unconscious in some sense, or habitual. Or it was a moral error that someone else, that they were beholden to, a lie on the part of their mother or father, someone they were tangled up with, someone malevolent, but, yeah, the pigeons come home to roost, man, and how could it be otherwise? You really think, you really think you have the capacity to bend the structure of reality without it eventually snapping back and hitting you in the face? Like, how arrogant can you possibly be to think that? And so, well, I came to believe that truth, in particular, spoken truth, but not only spoken truth, was the antidote to that, to that evil, and to that suffering, really, like really, truly the antidote to that. It's more complex than that, but that's something, and I also came to believe that each of us have far more, under our dominion, in terms of the destiny of the world, let's say, than we would ever even care to dare to dread, let's say, you know, I don't know how it works, but each of us, you know, we make decisions between heaven and hell all the time, with every decision, in fact, with every decision. That's a decision, up or down, and in some manner, the whole collective enterprise is guided by those individual decisions, and it's not washed away in the mix, you know, it's not, it's somehow not just your trivial action in the sea of seven billion random actions. We're networked, and our actions echo, and what we do or don't do, or what we do deceitfully, has ramifications far beyond what we can immediately see, or often are willing to immediately see. It's like, you know, the only more frightening realization than nothing you do matters is the realization that everything you do matters. It's like you wanna pick a existential terror. You think meaninglessness is terrifying. You try its opposite, and you see how terrifying that is, but it's a terror, it's a holy terror, right? It's a terror that sustains and ennobles, and every single person knows that that is true, knows that you're fleeing from your destiny by avoidance of the necessary responsibility that your conscience calls you towards. Everyone knows that, you know, and we toy with it, because we can, and we try to avoid it, because we test, we're immature, and we're bitter often, and it's not surprising, because people suffer dreadfully, and it's very difficult to suffer dreadfully without becoming bitter, but it doesn't help. All it does is make suffering worse and spreads it, and if the suffering is morally objectionable, spreading it is hardly going to rectify that. And so yeah, I'm optimistic about our possibilities, because I think we can do anything we set our minds to. And so hopefully we'll set our minds to the proper things, and every single one of you have to make that decision. And one of the things I really mean- That's one of the best things from, I think, one of his far better appearances in the Cambridge Union. Now, I wanted to connect that with what he, what C.S. Lewis says towards the end of one chapter in Mere Christianity. People often think that Christian morality, think of Christian morality as a kind of bargain in which God says, if you keep a lot of rules, I'll reward you, and if you don't, I'll do the other thing. I do not think that is the best way of looking at it, and I think that's a really nice way for Lewis to frame that. I would much rather say that every time you make a choice, you are turning the central part of you, a part of you that chooses into something a little different from what it was before, and taking your life as a whole with all your innumerable choices, and I loved how Peterson sort of networks us all together because our choices are all interconnected not only within ourselves but with each other, and taking your life as a whole with all your innumerable choices, all your life long, you are slowly turning the central thing either into a heavenly creature or into a hellish creature, either into a creature that is in harmony with God and with other creatures, there's that network, and with itself, or else into one that is in a state of war and hatred with God and with its fellow creatures and with itself, and there's sort of a nice reciprocal narrowing image. To be the one kind of creature is heaven, that is, it is joy and peace and knowledge and power. To be the other means madness, horror, idiocy, rage, impotence, and eternal loneliness, and right now, we're just tiny little bits of that, but as we grow, either reciprocally broaden or reciprocally narrow, this is what we become. Each of us at each moment is progressing to the one state or the other. That explains what always used to puzzle me about Christian writers. They seemed to be so very strict at one moment and so very free and easy at another. They talk about mere sins of thought as if they were immensely important, and then they talk about the most frightful murders and treacheries as if you had only got to repent and all would be forgiven, but I have come to see that they are right. What they are always thinking of is the mark which this action leaves on that tiny central self which no one sees in this life, but which each of us will have to endure or enjoy forever. One man may be placed that his anger sheds the blood of thousands, and another so placed that however angry he gets, he will only be laughed at, but the little mark on the soul may be much the same in both. Each has done something to himself which unless he repents will make it harder for him to keep out of the rage next time he is tempted and will make the rage worse when he does fall into it. Each of them, if he seriously turns to God, he can have that twist in the central man straightened out again. Each is in the long run doomed if he will not. The biggest or the smallness of things seen from the outside is not what really matters. One last point. Remember that as I said, the right direction leads not only to peace, but to knowledge. When a man is getting better, he understands more and more clearly the evil that is still left in him. When a man is getting worse, he understands his own badness less and less. A moderately bad man knows he is not very good. A thoroughly bad man thinks he is all right. This is common sense really. You understand sleep when you are awake, not while you are sleeping. You can see mistakes in arithmetic when your mind is working properly. While you are making them, you cannot see them. You can understand the nature of drunkenness when you are sober, but not when you are drunk. This is sort of a standpoint epistemology. Good people know about both good and evil. Bad people do not know either. Now, I'm gonna read the comments in a minute. I'm playing with how to do these live streams, and I wanna give you a chance to comment and say your piece too. I'm thinking perhaps about maybe doing these more regularly, maybe having a standard hour in which I do them. I'll have to figure that out, given the chaotic nature of my schedule. That's part of the reason that I mostly just record things. But I didn't wanna leave this just with Peterson, who for him to drag that heavy cross up the mountain, and what lies at the top of the mountain is where you meet, where you maximally meet and engage your responsibility. I'm not sure that's what's at the top of the mountain. That's certainly there, but that's not all that's there. And taken C.S. Lewis's point here, it sounds nearly hopeless, but it isn't hopeless. And of course, Lewis knows that. And so I'm going to include this bit from Cory Ten Boom's The Hiding Place. Cory Ten Boom was a woman living in the Netherlands when the Germans came into occupied. She very quickly saw what was happening to the Jews. And so she and her sister and her father decided to hide them, and they were found out. And so Cory and her sister went into the camps and her sister was a saint and she loved her sister. And she saw her sister die in the cruelty of these camps. And just imagine taking in these young women, having them strip for the amusement of the guards, working them to death. This is exactly what Peterson is talking about. After the war, Ten Boom became an itinerant preacher. And she preached about the grace and love of God. And she went to Germany. I continued to speak, partly because the home in Bloemendaal ran on contributions, partly because the hunger for Betsy's story seemed to increase with time. I traveled all over Holland to other places in Europe to the United States. But the places where the hunger was greatest was Germany. Germany was a land in ruin, cities of ashes and rubble. But more terrifying still, minds and hearts of ashes. Those central little parts of people over the course of the war were just turned. Click, click, click, click, click, all in one direction. And what we fear, listening to both what Peterson said and what Lewis says, is that if after living a life of clicking that heart in one direction, we go so far, we are irredeemable. But at the heart of Christianity is the message that yes, you are evil, but there is a power that can save. It was at a church service in Munich that I saw him. The former SS man who had stood guard at the shower room door in the processing center at Ravensbruck. He was one of our actual jailers that I had seen since that time. He was the first of our actual jailers that I had seen since that time. And suddenly it was all there. The room full of mocking men, the heaps of clothing, Betsy's pain blanched face. He came up to me as the church was emptying, beaming and bowing. How grateful I am for your message, Fraulein, he said, to think that as you say, he has washed my sins away. There's no con like the religious con. And many, many people see things like this and say, I can't buy it. There's no redemption for such a monster. He has turned that crank one notch at a time. He has put that little mark and that little place in him so much that it is blackened. He is beyond redemption. His hand was thrust out to shake mine. And I who had preached so often, I can't read this. It's hard to read. I who had preached so often to the people in Blumenthal, the need to forgive kept my hand at my side. Even as the angry, vengeful thoughts boiled through me, I saw the sin of them, the things in her. Corrie, who had hidden the Jews, who had lost her sister, she saw her sin. Her sin, this is exactly what Louis was talking about. Christ had died for this man. Was I going to ask for more? Lord Jesus, I prayed, forgive me and help me to forgive him. I tried to smile. I struggled to raise my hand. I could not. I felt nothing, not the slightest spark of warmth or charity. So again, I prayed a silent prayer. Jesus, I cannot forgive him. Give me your forgiveness. As I took his hand, the most incredible thing happened. From my shoulder, along my arm and through my hand, a current seemed to pass from me to him. While into my heart sprang a love for this stranger that almost overwhelmed me. I think about Dostoevsky and the brothers Karamazov. The miracle is, it's hard to forgive the people we know. She knew who this man was. Was he a stranger? Yes. If he had been just some random prison guard, maybe easier, but she knew his face. His face was seared into her mind in the trauma that she had endured. And so I discovered that it is not our forgiveness any more than our goodness that this world's healing hinges on, but his. When he tells us to love our enemies, he gives, along with the command, the love itself. I've read this part many times in my videos. I'll read a little more because the rest is important too. It took a lot of love. The most pressing need in post-war Germany was homes. Nine million people were said to be without them. They were living in rubble heaps, half-standing buildings, and abandoned army trucks. A church group invited me to speak to 100 families living in an abandoned factory building. Sheets and blankets had been hung between the various living quarters to make a pretense of privacy, but there was no insulating the sounds, the wail of a baby, the din of radios, the angry words of a family quarrel. How could I speak to these people of the reality of God and then go back to my quiet room in the church hostel outside the city? No. Before I could bring a message to them, I would have to live with them. Moves me every time. I don't know if the best way to do this is streaming a short like this or maybe to do just a little video, but I wanted to bring those things together. And part of why I'm playing with streaming is because, well, with streaming, I get to hear from you. And you're a lot of fun. So that's the planned portion I have of this. Let me see if I can release you from the box I have here. So yeah, a very difficult reading. The man wearing the luchador mask. So there's a short. And I'm thinking about, at least on some days, having sort of a scheduled time for maybe a half hour live stream. I still haven't figured out the technicalities of it. Rick often helps me with some of those things. And then when we do our Friday live stream, there's no live stream tomorrow, by the way. Today is Thursday and tomorrow is Friday. And so I will be in Salt Lake City for denominational work just for the day. And I will be back here at Living Stones on Sunday. So yeah, any comments you all wanna make? Yeah, going live now, eh? Yeah, playing around. I gotta keep one step ahead of you, Paul. Paul Anlightner's just coming up behind me doing commentary videos on Jordan Peterson and how to stay one step ahead of the competition. Always the friendly competition, though. We encourage each other and we learn from each other and we copy from each other and we build upon each other and we get better and better. So, do you really like the live short? I'm glad you caught it. Yeah, I feel so guilty about the discord. I've gotta figure all this stuff out. Going Mormon, why are you? Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. No live Q&A? Well, I suppose if you have a question, you can ask it now. Yeah, Cory Ten Boom, amazing. Well, you're welcome, taking time seriously. And thank you, Chad, for the super chat. And thank you, Chad, for the reaping work you're doing. Part of the reason I keep an eye on the people who are making clips of me is because when you make a clip of me, I know what's helpful and I learn language from you. So, I learn a lot from Grim Grizz, actually. So, I see that he's way up over 500, reaching 600. Good for you, Grim. Doesn't have to be every day. No, it won't be every day. Salt Lake City trip with your denomination. Yeah, we're invading Mormon territory, I suppose. Actually, I'm a synodical deputy and I have to go there to supervise some work in a neighboring classes. And so, that's what I do from time to time. New England soon? I hope New England soon. I have to talk to my mother. I'm trying to get to my mother to make a trip out here because frankly, the winter's a little nicer in Sacramento than in Massachusetts. Thank you, Alex. Up to date on the videos. That is no small task. I put out a lot. So, any other questions or comments you'd like me to see? Yeah, it does feel like a blessing. Thank you, Brian, Bob. Did you hear the Pizzo Q&A? No, I haven't. Well, you know, when you find good stuff like that, I mean, I can't possibly watch everything, which is why we have to watch things together. And as Grim says, we have to reap. And this is part of the reason I'm trying to do some shorter things because not everybody has the time. I know that some people have their truckers, their plumbers, their coders, and they have an enormous amount of time to listen to things. And so I make long videos for them. But there's many of us who want something short and to the point, which is titled properly so we can grab something. And ideally, it can be tied into something much longer. So, I might take what I did early on here and clip it a little bit for something else. I don't know. So, let's see, more questions. Yeah, so, Mark, if there's something in the Peugeot Q&A, yeah, I don't know, point it, have Grim reap it, the Grim Reaper. Have the Grim Reaper take it or something like that because every minute, oh, that's, I'll have to listen to it then. I'm reading Corrine Tamboum, while my daughter is in the hospital. Helpful perspective while suffering. Yes, indeed. Oh, it's, you know, Chad, there's sense of humor is an important thing. So, don't be ashamed of your silliness. Yeah, yeah, What Up's been writing a lot of good comments lately. Andrea, will you be talking about the sexuality situation for clergy on your trip? No, it's not a, it's a, it's basically a trip where a pastor is deciding he needs to have a leave of absence to step away from ministry for a while. And there's a lot of pastors who are feeling that in COVID. And in order to do that in the Christian Reformed Church, you need basically permission. And so your classes has to process that. And then synodical deputies, which are individuals from other classes have to go and make sure that the classes is processing it correctly. So there's all of these checks and balances and a denomination, which gives us a better chance at not doing some egregious thing, but hopefully adds a little bit of communion and accountability. So that's what I'm going to Salt Lake to do. Are you excited for the Jordan Peterson tour? I'm, I have, I fear it will be decadent too. You know, but then again, you know, he does the tour. I don't. I, I don't know, you know, and in some ways it's selfish. We all have views on things and we don't know. He sees things from different perspectives. What his goal and desire for the book tour is, well, obviously to sell books and ticket prices are not small. Someone said like one of them with a VIP ticket was almost $300. That's a lot of money. So, and then someone said, yeah, but Paul, you'll wind up doing it. And my friends in Fresno are like, oh, come down to Fresno. We'll do a meetup and then we'll go together. So that's always the fun, the fun of the tour. I seldom hear him say anything new in those little tour talks, but the fun of the tour is getting together with all the other people. And so that's, that's, that's actually the, where the real fun is. So, so yeah, we'll, we'll see what happens. We'll see what he does with the channel. I mean, this is the second time around. I'm sure he learned from the first time. They've probably got a bunch of materials buffered, I think, and maybe they'll take some from the tour. I think they're going to, he's got a YouTube channel with 4 million plus subs and his mission is to help individuals change. So I don't think they'll leave it fallow this time. I'm more concerned that, you know, this kind of travel is hard on people, but you know, he knows himself. We'll see. I hope, hope it goes well. Oh, you're going to, Mark's going to be in New England in December. Good. But Joe's talk with Bishop Baron. Yeah, that was good too. I watched that one. That's the problem with the, I don't know if I'm going to get, take a chat. We do, we really do need more Reapers. We do. Yeah. I want to do, I don't know, because I'm spending a half hour doing this. I want to do another video on deconstruction because there's, there's more to say about that. And yeah, I want to do a video on deconstruction. More cowbell. Hey, there's Rick. Oh good. Rick's got a wrench. So Rick, if, if someone behaves, see that's the idea of doing this at a regular time. Cause dirty little secret, Rick got a day job. You know, Rick didn't have a day job. Rick was always a very, very busy man. He was always a very busy man. He was always a very busy man. He was always a very busy man. Rick was always available. So if we were going to have fun or we had a little project and now Rick's got a day job. So, so I got to learn to do, I got to put on my big boy pants and be my own streamer. So, but Rick's got the, Rick's got the wrench. Anselman has a wrench too. I might have to hand out some more wrenches, but yeah, the idea would be, I would do this kind of at the same time every day, maybe for a half hour. Greetings from the DR. Hey, Christian Fernandez. Oh, wow. The DR. And I've got to listen to more of the, I'm right now working through the sociology conversation with Karen, which is excellent. And I'm also playing around as you might know from my Twitter feed with taking little clips and posting them on Twitter. And I'm also posting some of those on my Vander Clips channel, which has laid, which has lay fallow for a while. So I'm working on that. So, what do you make of the minor attracted person issue? It's as if we don't know this. I mean, we're playing games with ourself about human nature. And one of the things that I saw immediately about Jordan Peterson was he had a, he had a sober and realistic view of human nature. Yeah. I'll make the two hour drive for that. Neoplatonism. I should see the talk. I saw Jacob that you did. I actually, I've been in some of your live streams, Jacob, but I often get into live streams in the evening. And if I'm doing something with my wife, if she runs off to the bathroom or goes to get changed or runs an errand or something, I'll check out some of the live streaming going on. But it's all about attention. And in the evening, when I'm with my wife, my attention belongs to her. And so not to live streams and playing around with this kind of thing. Do a video about UFOs. I've been thinking about that. Actually, I've been thinking about that for a long time, but I don't know that I have enough thoughts on UFOs. Oh yes, definitely Chad. Have him sign your mask. That would be awesome. Yeah, we talk about deconstruction, but what about reconstruction? And I think that's actually Chad, that's a really good point because what we're doing is we're setting people up for deconstruction, but many churches and many movements in churches that are sort of like reform movements, but are at heart parasitic, they're not offering much in terms of reconstruction. And I think that's part of the reason that Orthodoxy and Catholicism and what I call neo-sacramentalist churches are doing fairly well at this because they've got a better basis. And movements that are fundamentally reactive or parasitic are major on deconstructive, but don't help much with reconstructive. Hey, there's Anselman. Good, another wrench in the room. J jobs are the worst, I know. Yeah, one of these days, Mark, you'll get a day job again and there will be. No, I've actually, Graham, I've actually got the join feature, but I've never, I've tried to resist the pay-per-view aspect of the channel. And that's why I don't do it with Patreon either. I also have a Patreon that I, for the most part, ignore, sorry patrons, but that's sort of what I promised at the beginning, that I'm not doing anything for the patrons, partly because I have issues with pay-per-view. I understand how money can be used as sort of an interest gate, but there are many people who are very interested and have no money. And so I try to find ways that, you know, that they can participate. And that's why I love, so the way church works, nobody charges, or at least very few people, you don't have to pay to come into a church to listen to a sermon or to sing with the community or anything like that. You can let the plate go by, all of that is true. It's not withheld from you. And so I've always sort of tried to keep my YouTube channel that way. And so the join feature, yeah, I could make more money doing that kind of thing, but I, you know, again, my druthers is, if you like what I'm doing in my channel, give money to my church. There might come a day when, let's say if the church goes under, but in a lot of ways, because of many of your contributions to the church, the church is still up. And also the church is supportive of what I do. I can imagine many churches that would say, Paul, stop this. It's taking too much of your time. He wants you to focus on other things. But the church hasn't said that, so. All right. Yeah, Eric Metaxas, of course, was Greek. He was a cradle Orthodox. Joe mentioned lizard people. I think that deconstruction, which is done with faith and trust in Jesus can lead to a revelation. Oh, oh, Sarah, you redacted it. I was just reading it. Oh, well. See, if I do this at a regular time, then y'all know when you can find it, when you can find each other. And that's cool. Job has just redone the Estuary Hub site, because of course Vindank had no idea what he was doing. And so the link will be in my videos, estuariahub.org, I think it is. And then you can find a list of estuaries, and I'm a bad estuary leader. I've really got a New Year's resolution, and I'm gonna get the Sacramento estuary up and running. It's a little different though. I gotta keep my eye on the time, because this afternoon I'm doing the OG Rando's talk with Luke and Job and Sam and Jeff. So I'm really looking forward to that. And I've gotta record my rough draft for Sunday, and I've got a council meeting tonight, so I've got to get the agenda ready for that. I pulled and judged us all. You need a savior, and I'm not him. Ha ha ha ha. All right. All right, I promised I'd be here a half hour, and I think I'm a little bit over that. So thank you for coming, and I appreciate your presence here. Yeah, I have to, my son Jared likes the idea of the working conference. Rick was a little bit more on the fence. I haven't given the idea to Roger yet. It takes some doing to actually put that together, but there are a bunch of things that need doing around here. We're sort of rehabbing a building, because we have, our church plant is meeting with us, and actually Mark, the church planter, likes doing that kind of thing, so he's putting canned lights in one of the rooms, and it needs all sorts of things. You need a feminine presence in that convo. Where's Sherry? Yeah, Sherry would be good. All right, have a good weekend, y'all. Take care of yourselves, and I gotta figure out how to, I just gotta press this little button, and I stop. So thanks for coming in.