https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DfJufm_gzww

 Wonderful. Well, I just started recording and I won't share with anybody until after you've seen it and would give permission but Um, I I had a cancellation today so the slack got opened up and you jumped on so that's wonderful But we only have a half hour. So yeah Yeah Yeah, well what I want to talk to you about is these supernatural experiences and um, and how the church i've tried my catholic church who just ran away and i've tried my um, Evangelic evangelical free church who've just ran away and nobody i'll talk at all But I managed to talk to them today because about 2012 13 maybe Before I went to israel anyway, because I told the pastor who I went to israel with about it Um, I was driving along minding my own business listening to radio 4, which is very high brown english bbc program All about the news and they were talking about isis and I said lord What we're going to do about isis just like that and he answered me clear as day and he said Don't worry about isis. They are all gonna end up holed up in Aleppo and I didn't even know where Aleppo was I had to look it up on a map Now I was saying to my pastor today while the assistant pastor How many sieges have there been in history maybe 12 maybe So forgot to tell me that isis were going to end up besieged is a miracle And then to tell me where they were going to end up And I went to israel with paul begley, you know on the youtube channel Have you seen paul begley? No Pastor paul begley massive youtube channel does all the news and things very Very old school Evangelical christian, you know Baptist I think but a free church Tiny little church like yours Anyway, so we send our money to america because they're actually doing the work you see so we listen to the lot We listen to all of them. I'll tell you why in a minute anyway So I told paul begley and he says what's going to happen to isis he says will they be finished I says more or less More or less finished though, but still be a few this is what god told me Just straight into my spirit the understanding They'll just be a few they'll still be around but they'll hardly make any trouble, right? So that's number one, right? This is the whole thing started because like I say i've always worked with the lord, right but Just had little personal messages, you know, just like normal people, you know But then one day i'm letting my bed watching a youtube video, right? Just praying as you do just like being a normal person And then I had what's called an open vision didn't even know the name for it And I saw two suns in the sky back two suns in the sky So that's what started me looking up things on youtube. This must have been 2010 2011 something like that And the only videos I could find were chinese And all the writing Were chinese, right Which I thought was just weird anyway, so they must have been having some revisions or two suns appeared in the sky, right? So one was a big sun the normal sun and then there was a small one next to it Smaller at about four o'clock something like that About 45 degrees off, you know Off the bottom So i'm looking at this and then I've got an old photograph big photograph brain photographs from the very young that my mother had and I saw that photograph So it like panned around and I saw that photograph and then it all went white And everything just finished so I didn't know what to make of this And then i'm walking down my path because we were living out in the shed because we had too many people in the house So we camped out into the shed me and my husband and i'm walking down my shed. I remember it was a lovely day And then I felt like i've been plugged into the ground And energy was coming up onto the ground and the top of my head and that lasted for three days Completely wore me out. Yeah, completely wore me out And do you know that do you know when you're praying in the spirit? Do you know that feeling where you're full of energy? Right now i've always been able to heal not me god could always heal people through me, right? So Laying hands on people but it used to quite wear me out. Do you know what I mean? I felt like the energy was but now It's different if I if I heal Um praying healing up with somebody it's like the energy's coming up through the ground If you need to then it doesn't have any effect on me at all or out of the air It can come out of the air anywhere. And so now I just lay hands on and before I used to have to sight myself up Oh, you know, I needed to leave quite exhausted I needed to take me a long time to recover No, it doesn't now I can just let but I don't do it often only when god leads me But that was another miracle because this whole base that I said to my husband after feeling like i've been plugged into the ground And having this I looked it up online only thing I could think was a kundalini experience and they all said that's dead demonic So I thought I was under demonic attack what with visions that weren't biblical because I knew that they weren't anyway in the end I took it to go like I should have done in the first place. I took it to go. I says lord What are you trying to tell me? Are you trying to tell me it's the end of the world and he said yes as clear as about so that made me really Decide to look at where the church was and really get back into my religion big stuff So I went down to the church try and talk to them. I waited outside the mass For four weeks in a row, but no nobody had talked to me talked the author down the tube I didn't need to talk about anything like that So I abandoned that and then I got really sick with ms And um, I let him bed for well, first of all, they said it was a sleep disc because my back went So they said only thing is like like i'm quiet So I did that for about six months that didn't work. I went back down to them. Um, And they sent me to some they sent this send me to some test but we're on the nhs here You know what? I mean you get all the tests, but you might have to wait a year, you know for the test anyway They did a bit of a brain scan found like a lot of white patches missing So they said that's all good sam. My sister's got ms. It was only when my eyes started like, um seeing double But they said I would think it's probably ns But then they want ms but they wanted me to go in one of these big body scanners and after the brain scan That was enough for me. I'm claustrophobic And they sent me for one. I got the gown on and everything but it was down in a basement You've got a line dense still for 45 minutes So I thought maybe if I can come out in the middle of this end now, it'd be no good You've got to start all over again, so You've got to admit your limitations in this life. So I said that we'll just call that one a day Anyway, they're going to reschedule me for one of these open ones in london, you know, so they've got no problem But I got fed up by that state. So I found a church that did Spiritual healing and they laid hands on me and I got better But the reason The reason i'm really talking to you is my husband was a complete atheist Really? Atheist. Yeah, I wrote to you do that and he played me. Um, this is what caused all the trouble in the first place about 2009 He played me and insisted I watch What's his face? Um, Richard Dawkins, I was forgetting him, Richard Dawkins and I was empolled and absolutely Absolutely furious furious beyond furious and so after that Everything that came into the house. I give christian perspective and he had never heard the christian perspective at all And all the family fell out with me. Everybody refused to speak to me for about two years this length of And in the end I ended up watching all the religious people online And just getting more and more into my religion and just avoiding them all and saying I don't care I don't care what you do. You can leave you can go do anything you want, but i'm not bothered You know, I made a stand for god if you understand what I mean and um And I prayed for him to have supernatural Experiences, right and during this time i've watched Steve quail You know the pastor Steve quail Have you ever heard of no that was Steve quail's by famous in America. Anyway, he said I want you in one of his big long talks because he can talk worse than me can Steve And he said yeah, I want you as a match actually there to get a bottle of oil, right He says it can be olive oil or else if you've got some holy oil that's even better. Bless it And I've not told your house all the way around right? So my husband sat outside on my decking Minding his own business and hears all these voices over the fence whispering terrible Afterwards like we managed to calm him down and he's under demonic attack and he said but why were they over the fence? I said, I'm not surprised they were over the fence. I said I I know I know you to the whole ice with oil They're not allowed to come in on property and the whole thing He had so many supernatural experiences he's a complete christian then playing in the bands down at the church So the point i'm trying to make with all this is I took him to see david ike for a 12 hour talk which he sat through trying to walk in his mind 12 hours No, just to get into it, you know think outside the box Because he's been very spoke And I thought well he's had enough of religion Showing some secular stuff but no And I played in dark secrets of bohemian grove, which he thought was just didn't didn't even register at all But since I played in dark secrets of bohemian grove and he sees it from my point of view He's completely on board with me now his mindset has changed so completely Right now the girls are my girls won't talk to me my older she says you've already brainwashed daddy. I'm not speaking to you But the only way is to pray you see I pray for him to have supernatural experiences and he says that that was only thing But actually opened his mind so we can talk and talk and talk but unless god actually comes And works because he can do a work. I couldn't do with all my persuasion with all my logic with all my everything I had to get god To come and do it for me Do you understand what i'm saying? I certainly do I certainly do yeah Yeah, so that's the point i'm trying to make but I have another miracle my i've got severely autistic She's 22 now, but we took her to israel with us. She was about 20 at the time We took her to israel and and she doesn't understand the great deal But she's got a very good relationship. We got very much like freddy. I love watching freddy very so nice I think you're born I would say A bit worse than freddy because she's severely autistic very anti-social girl But we took her into the river georgia now You know what have you ever been on her to her to israel you don't get no explanation here You just the whistles stop in the georgia and I said to her what we went in because nobody explained Baptism or anything to her I said do you want to go in holly? She says yeah, I want to go in I thought so that fair enough so we got her in the robe and we dumped her in the water. All right She come out And her face was all shiny And she says oh Hold it Do you know what i'm saying? Isn't that is the biggest miracle i've ever seen that And before he was a christian my husband was a christian We had a friend very dear friend flat out in a coma The consultant had just been talking to my husband saying that um There were no hope he like had seven paddle out of hospital cardiac arrest, you know Um, there was no hope whatsoever But I just had an open vision that was my second open vision and i'm driving along the road and i'm thinking Where's the blue minute camera because i'm sat in a hospital but i'm driving along the road the radio's playing and everything And i'm in a rush. That's all I knew and then I looked around and I noticed I was up at the top of the road And then the phone rang and I couldn't hear him but he could hear me Well, I hope you could and I said i'm late because i'm always late. I says i'm late, but i'm on my way I'm just up at the top of the road So I knew that he was going to be all right Because god had showed me that he was going to be all right. So I knew that he could come in agreement for healing So I said to richard I says do me a favor and he says anything I says come in agreement with me So we prayed over him And i'm not joking within 20 minutes. He sat up. He's looking around. He's still got the ventilator So he could only nod Before And he's made a full recovery or near enough before recovery The only thing he's been left with is a bit of dizziness. That's it. He's working 10 hour days Wow, you know and These miracles Were what convinced my husband not all this nagging The suit Do you know what i'm saying I love it I love it but i've been praying for him for years But I prayed for him. This is for somebody else who's in the same place. I prayed for him to have supernatural experiences And he did he had all kinds of terrible supernatural experiences Like I started to see black things running from to the car and I said to him about it and he says well i've seen them too I said well So we were driving along one night and he saw one going from to the car and I said, okay Then what were that? He's what you saw it to I says yeah, he says describe it to him He saw I told him it reminded me of the smoke out of lost have you seen the smoke out of loss? The smoky creature out of loss loss. Yeah the tv show. Yeah That's the nearest I could say and it was like About that long about two foot long Zipped in front of us and I told him what i'd seen and he says I saw exactly the same So he knew then but it wasn't all in his head, you know If both of you see it Yeah, it was like well, he said it could be like some kind of mental illness between both of us, but we're not No, I'm saying there's a pound, you know, no i'm not I asked I won't ask because i've had a quite hard hard childhood and a lot of bad things happened to me You know when I was younger, but I once asked the psychologist I said why haven't I had a nervous breakdown? He says some people never will he says some people never will and i'm one of those people i'm Very solid, you know what i'm saying? i'm very persevering but Now I just get these visions all of a sudden I get these words from god Like i'm praying for a woman down the church and um, I says oh I says I hear you She says oh, no. No, i'm all right. I says oh I says I must have been praying for the wrong person She says oh, no. No, it's me Oh, i'm okay, no it was actually doing loads of cancer stuff And then I just got a word from the lord and I says oh I think you're gonna be okay She says I know I am I says no You're gonna be all right. I've just had a word, you know, it's really weird Have you heard anything like this before? Oh, yes. Oh, yes all the time. Oh, yes. Oh, yes And see people don't want to talk about it in public Because we live in a secular society and you lose status if you talk like this because people wonder if you're crazy And maybe you are but maybe I am too. So I have lots of friends who have experiences like this, but they don't talk about them Yeah, but what about a leper? What can you say about a leper? That's a that's really cool. I that's it's not my place to judge I Can't make a judgment on it. I don't know what's going to happen to isis. So i've just I just love hearing the story They've gone on there more or less. There's a few Yeah, but they're not the big band that they used to be I don't know. What have I heard? The recent I had two recently I was in venez, right? Um overlooking a big square and What it was last year in september and there was all the floods in um Japan and I said lord what is happening with the world and he showed me Mr obama and he was about this far away from me leering at me and he um Blue robes on he's not in office by this time right blue robes on with white symbols on them And a big white feather on his head And he's just nasty and he scared me he really scared me so his robes was fault according to god That we've got all this bad And um And my friend who was in the coma His daughter-in-law was having a baby, you know happily married with his son And it was her second and I knew no I didn't even know she was having a boy and god told me his name's going to be Called daniel And he says and he's going to be called danny and his mother's not going to like it because she's going to keep saying his name's Daniel he's not And his name's daniel Ha ha ha Oh, I have two major dreams as well same dream six months apart There was a big tree massive big supernatural tree all the animals lived in it towns underneath everybody was dependent on this tree And it was destroyed Hit my lightning and badly destroyed and everybody worked so hard and got it back together again And worked and worked and everybody said it's not the same as it was but it's good And we can see that we've got a future of this tree and all the animals were back and all the towns were back thriving And then it was destroyed again And there was only this much left about six ten inches out of the ground only a little bit All tried and a big pit around it and everybody was stood around crying saying We'll never get back from it. Wow. We'll never get back from this and that's the economic system 2008 god because I asked him when I had first of all, I just I woke up crying from this dream twice And first time I just thought you know something you've eaten is something but the second time the dream was Identical and I knew it was the same and then I knew it was a message from god and I prayed about it And he said it's the economic system So after 2008 we've got it back together and it's all going it's never the same but it's going again But the next time It'll be absolutely apparent to everybody That we'll be able to do nothing Understand that's and then about two years ago Up in heaven, there's a massive door massive big door and it was not clean off its hinges And there were three Like hell's angel type people behind it giants and they were just about to come through and I woke up with a stomp That's that was another one. Well, what did that mean? Do you think evil spirits coming into our realm? That's what that Wow, you see around you know, don't you but there that's what that's what I saw they were very The nearest of sin is on an opera French opera there were you know, the big boots big black boots a bit like Hagrid out of harry potter Evil version of them big giants coming through They didn't open the door. They kicked it Clean off its hinges Wow, that's what I saw So we're living in very dangerous times and I think god's equipping his people and he's getting us together And he's saving who can be saved. That's what I feel That's why People are watching videos of anything Because the same people are watching the lot You know and and called to prayer, you know, god's told me quite clearly so I spent Eight ten hours a day praying I watch you in between watch a few videos pray Find something else to pray about pray pray pray, you know Thank you. Well pray for me I do pray for you. Yeah And then look at and I ask god sometimes And when I was on my own and everybody in my family weren't speaking to me. I didn't have a church. I was completely isolated God showed me ezekiel in the cave and he told me there's people like you all around the world There are There are there's people like me all around the world praying for you. Thank you How do you say your name shivon it's an irish name shivan Yeah irish shivan shivan like yvonne shivan you can say shivon if you're posh Yeah Yeah, she got it's an irish name. It's irish for jone Joe there's a lot of My daddy was from ireland Oh, that's another thing that happened. My mother died recently And you know what the catholics are like, well, you don't probably but the catholics don't believe in anything like supernatural really But the priest said he saw a white light come down from heaven and in his spirit She jumped in it and didn't even look back and we're gone My mother She wasn't ill. She wasn't ill at all. Then she just got a bit of a cold now She went down to town to have a haircut on the friday and she was dead on the way Unbelievable, isn't it? Wow. Wow. I love it I thank you so much for I had this little open slot and because someone cancelled and you jumped right in and this has Just been delightful. So I will send you this video and now you can publish it. It's fine. Okay, I This was so enjoyable. Thank you so much and thank you for praying for me I I do too. We pray for you me and my husband pray for you and I get a little prayer for you. Well next time Next time you call have your husband on with you. I'd love to meet him. Yeah, he's here. Come here. Just have a way Okay Am I on Thanks so much for for sharing your wife with us this has been a delight Good good I love her stories I i'm the one i'm on shavon's youtube Channel, but i'm the one that that puts a lot of comments on on your videos. Oh wonderful It's me doing the commenting but it's shavon's Yes Yeah, keep going tell freddy we're loving okay i'll i'll let him know thanks a lot. Thank you very much. Bye. Bye