https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=YCo8EdU4xa4

 How are you Caleb? I'm well, how are you Paul? I'm doing well, I'm doing well. It's nice to talk to you. It's nice to talk to you as well. I gotta admit, I'm a little nervous. I feel underprepared to talk to you. There's no preparation necessary. Okay, all right. Everything will be absolutely fine. All right, sounds good. So I'm recording this and if you want me to stop recording, I can. I'll just share the recording with you and if it's something we both want to share after for some reason or if you want to keep it private or all of that is fine, but I just record it because people are like, what did we say again? As in the night. Okay, all right, excellent. So tell me a little bit about you because I don't know anything about you. You probably know a little more about me. Just a little bit. I've only just stumbled into your fan base and your Discord. Oh, and you got a slot right away? Oh, you're lucky. Yeah, the real reason I took this call was or signed up for it was Nay was showing me around the Discord and she showed me how to set up a meeting with you and there was an empty slot and she had this look in her eyes like I had the golden ticket. So I was like, I don't even know what I would say to Paul but I guess I'll take it. Well, there you go. You got the golden ticket. It was predestined. I feel very lucky. Yeah, well, I'm part of the group that Sherry Harkins put together, the artist group. Yeah, and we've met a few times now and I felt very lucky with that situation as well because I had only just found your work through watching a lot of Jordan Peterson and a lot of Jonathan Paget and I think your interview with her was maybe the third video of yours I watched. Oh, wow. And it spoke to me immediately and her story and what she was wanting to do. So I just reached out to her and found myself in the group chat and the meetings and it's been an amazing experience for me. So yeah, a little bit about myself. I grew up in the church and a very small group, is evangelical, I would say, full gospel. I didn't have a great experience with that. There was a lot of legalism and sort of forced faith situations. So as I got older, I found myself walking away from the church as I got to college age and not even because I didn't particularly believe or wasn't convinced more so just because the experience I had made it very difficult to accept Christianity in general. And so then I sort of wandered out of my faith walk for a few years. I had went to a Christian university, a small private Christian college, didn't have a super good experience there but had one theology professor who I made a close friendship with and he was a good mentor figure. And he was really the only person whose arguments were convincing to me at all, were really compelling. And then I sort of wandered off, sort of didn't do anything with my life for a few years. I found myself able to pay the bills, pay off my debt. And so I just sat around doing that and I felt very purposeless. And that's when I stumbled into the whole Jordan Peterson meaning wave, meaning crisis situation. And I was there around 2017, 2018. So I was reading his book and listening to his lectures pretty early on before most of the scandals. That had a huge impact on me. And then I continued to follow his work. I've started to explore my faith again but I sort of the way he does a lot of things, I have to do it through intellect first and through rationalization first. And then I'm sort of constantly struggling with the leap of faith right at the end. And so that's been my experience. And with the whole Jordan Peterson thing, it really worked for me, the things that he was teaching because it basically, by applying the principles in his first book, I went from a near brush with suicide at 23 to being in a highly selective, difficult to get into film program, which film was my dream and getting accepted and pursuing my career goals within about a year. Wow. Yeah. That's pretty impressive. But you're a golden ticket kind of guy, apparently. You know, there are people like that. So it seems like that's you, lucky you. Yeah, but I have a tendency to fail up. So I stumble into a lot of things and then I don't always know how to, capitalize on the opportunities that I'm blessed with. But yeah, and then that first wave sort of ended. And I was much closer to finding my faith walk again, I would say. And then I got very deep into Young and Nietzsche. And I sort of found that the struggling to grasp intellectually was sort of my back door back into Christianity. Because I understood all of the faith and all of the sort of tradition and the sort of Bible talk so well that it meant nothing to me. It was a door that was just unappealing to even touch. And then right about that time, right about March of last year, I just found myself in a series of difficulties with my film program that I was in, which is why I joined the artist group. And I've talked to them about that a little bit and it's been very helpful and insightful. And I basically had to leave my program because of the way they were handling COVID. It didn't look like there was gonna be any real opportunities moving forward. They were completely unprepared. And so I was a little worried about the future, came up with a secondary plan that seemed good, executed on it, and then sort of just stumbled into oblivion for about six months, just back to not doing anything with my life, trying to and trying to put things back together. But just, yeah, the dominoes fell apart and I was right back into the abyss. And then I find myself now having a stronger faith walk because of that, but it's still something that I'm unsure of how to frame my faith walk. And a lot of opportunities have started coming together that feel like I have God's direction in my life and I know what path to go down again. And I'm just sort of at a point where I'm trying to make sure that that's correct and hesitant to sort of venture out again. But I find myself very lucky to have found a bunch of, you know, this group, your channel, but also that Jordan Peterson happens to be coming back right now. And his new work is sort of, I was watching your commentary on the Russell Brand interview last night. And a lot of what you're bringing up is a lot of what I find helpful in his second book, that sort of need for community and what church provides and everything. And so I find myself now trying to find my way back into church, but having to work through a lot of hesitancy around even just a building in a way. So, yeah. Well, with COVID, heck of a time to try to find your way back into church when, well, depending on where you live, churches are, you know, people are wearing masks or churches are closed or churches are, they're either hiding under a rock because of COVID or they're sort of taking the, you know, deciding this is a great opportunity to make political noises because of COVID, both of which are a distraction because the church should be about the church, not about COVID or government or, you know, any of those things or safetyism. So, no, that's really interesting. You know, your story strikes me because part of, you know, so part of Peterson's, especially 12 Rules for Life, I think as you really laid out is very much trades upon his recommendation of set a goal, pursue a goal. You'll get meaning, you'll get opportunity. And all of that is true, but the opposite is, well, that's not really the opposite, but if you do those things, even though, as you said, you've been quite fortunate in that, gosh, first time you look for a slot, you get a slot with me, that never happens. I get emails from people like, I keep looking for slots and they're always full. They always are because I keep them full. And then I, you know, I look ahead in my week and say, I got some time this week. And so I open up slots and then people come across them. But the, sometimes I talk to people and they, okay, so they started Peterson's program, boy, they got some, you know, they got some good feedback, some things really got going. And then of course you hit a wall. And then the question is, what do you do when you hit that wall? And in many ways, part of what religion does, and especially community does, is provide a scaffolding underneath so that when you, you know, it's not unlike, I was watching Eric Huddle, I think that's his name, the guy who went up El Capitan without any ropes at all. But when they were training for that, finding the way up, you basically, you rope in, you try to go up, but you've got, you know, you're pinned down here. So you try to go up and you sort of, you know, then you fall. And of course it's not much fun falling because you fall and you smack, or you've got that rope and that smacks you against that wall. So it's not nice, but you've got that rope. And a lot of what religion, community, church does is sort of provide like that rope. So you don't have to sort of free solo up, you know, all of El Capitan, because any one of us saying, wow, that's a big piece of rock, ooh, I can get 20 feet. Yeah, but you're not gonna go 3,500 feet like that. It is not going to happen because, you know, none of us are that good. Very few of us are that good. And those who actually get that good, get that good by falling a thousand times within their regiment. And so what you're doing is exactly the right thing because you, I mean, so you had the realization, gosh, I need to clean my room. I need to tell the truth. I need to, you know, all of these things. And then you start up and you're like, hey, I'm making progress. And you get to a certain point and life happens. Now here in the West, we, and Peterson is right about this, you know, cause I lived in the developing world for a while. If in fact, without a lot of, you know, really cruciform truth telling and determination, you can make progress. There are jobs out there. There are people who will mentor you. There's a lot of goodness out in this world in the West, which is part of the reason a lot of people want to get to the West. Cause there's so much opportunity. Cause so much has been built into these systems. So you do get initial success, but you will hit a wall and you will stumble and that will smack you and get back against that wall. And almost anybody who's lived any life at all has how many resets in their life. And what they usually learn, you know, sort of like a climber every time, every time you fail, if you can learn about that and if it doesn't kill you and if it doesn't discourage you, you now attack that wall with more than the time you attacked it with previously. And I'm glad you joined Sherry's group and I'm glad you found the discord because I mean, when I saw Jordan Peterson's rise in 2016, 2017, you know, I've watched, the same thing happens in church. Someone comes into church for a Sunday, not very often at Living Stones cause we're this tiny little insignificant church. But if I were in a mega church with beautiful music and all of this stuff, people come in and they have this experience and like, and then, you know, they come to you after the service and they're just crying, Oh, pastor, I don't like, this has just changed my life. And you know, you try not to be a cynic and you just say, Oh, so glad this is happy for you and pray for you and all of this. But in the back of my mind, I know you're just starting down this road and you know, a month or three months or six months, you're gonna come up to me and say, it didn't pan out. And I say, really? Because you had this initial vision of, I found the golden ticket. I found the secret to life. I found, well, good. That secret to life is gonna get you about 20 feet up that wall. And then something's gonna happen and you're gonna fall. And I hope you have a rope because if you're, I mean, pity the people and you see this sometimes. You look at people, they get right out of college and they just have enormous success and everything goes easy and they get up 100, 200, 300 feet and they've never learned, you need a rope. You need people around you. You need mentors who are gonna say, yeah, that first hundred feet goes pretty good but there's a little area up there that, all of the things you use to get to that first hundred feet, they're not gonna get you past that. And how do you know that? Well, because I was watching a dude up there and he fell. I thought, we've gotta be something up there. And so, no, I think you're doing it the right way and you're thinking it through. And in terms of Christianity for a lot of people, again, Peterson's video, I don't know if you saw the video I recently did on transformations where I played a little bit of this conversation with Eric Weinstein because Peterson made the point, he said, he's watched people and he's noted that people have a limited number of transformations within them. And I've had this exact same experience. Some people I know have exactly the same faith they had when they, if they're in a believing baptism church, when they got baptized at 16 or in my position, they got made profession of faith at 16, whatever. They have exactly the same faith they had at 16. And I know people who have the same faith they had at 16 and they're still going strong because it was solid and they were able to endure, but basically that's their framework and it works for them and it's held them, but they had one sort of one transformation in their life and it was able to carry in their whole life and it's like, praise God. Many people, they, you know, they had the faith they had at 16 or 18 and then they hit something at 20 or 22 and then they fall. And okay, so the world isn't exactly like you thought it was when you were 16 or 14. What are you gonna do? You're gonna stay in bitterness? You're gonna stay in, you're gonna, you're gonna just gonna keep trying this other thing? And so, no, what I, but then when you come back to the Christian faith, it's like, oh, and often what happens is you look at even what maybe you rejected before, ah, that was simplistic, it was false, it didn't work, but then you see it through new eyes and you say, well, there are certainly some issues with it, but part of my, part of my evaluation of it and my rejection of it was coming from me. And because all evaluation is done based on the yardstick we have in our head. So, no, it sounds to me like you're doing the right thing and it sounds to me like you're doing pretty well. Well, I appreciate that. Yeah, well, I think I'm doing just well enough. I think I'm at the point where I'm just starting to climb again, but it was only a few months ago that I had that first real fall off the mountain and I was climbing the mountain with no rope. So, I snuck down hard. Hitting the ground hard sucks, doesn't it? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, well, and I think with Jordan Peterson's, you know, whole first book and everything, he constantly brings up this, he'll push people forwards and he talks in this inspiring way, but he'll often bring up this warning, right at the last minute, about being careful where you set your aim and how high you set it and everything. And I think that that matches what you're saying about the mountain very well is, if you're climbing the mountain and then suddenly realize you have to get all the way to the top, like that's where the break is, because you don't have a rope, you don't have anything to rely on, then the mountain's terrifying and then the mountain's judging you. Then that's what he says, your ideal starts to judge you. And for me, I think that's exactly why I fell off the mountain. It wasn't even the hardship that I faced, but was the realization that I could climb all the way, but I would have to climb all the way in order for anything to work, which has also completely changed my way of understanding the idea of Christ and the idea of Christianity being unique because of the relationship. To me, it seems like God giving you that rope so that you stand a chance to even climb the mountain. And I think that falling and realizing how important that rope is, is really the only thing that made me finally accept a rope. I think the way my life had went, I thought, well, I had taken on sort of a, well, if Christ can do it, how far can man get a lone idea? And I got obsessed with the patriarchs and studying all of them and then studying Gnosticism and all these different ideas. And I had come to reject what I saw as the simple, Christian, well, God's made a way for you, he's done it for you, so now the sacrifice is over, so relax, was sort of always how it had been told to me. And I think, especially with what you're saying about transformation, like the idea of some people, they have their faith forged at like 15, and then some people that carries them all the way through life, it's sort of shocking, but they never go beyond that simple thing. And they get despised for it, which always annoys me because part of me looks at them and says, that's really impressive. Yeah. But it's true, it happens, it works. Yeah, yeah. I'm sorry, I lost my train of thought a little bit. I probably just corrupted you. That's okay. I had always seen that as sort of, well, that seems too simple. And I had argued with my theology professor a lot about, I see the whole point of the leap of faith, but it seems to me, people walk up to this gorge and just leap all the time. And there's a pile of wood here that you could easily start to make a bridge and you could leap the last few feet, but why is everyone just bolting over? And it was frustrating to me, so I decided I was gonna build the bridge as far as I could go and see if I could even get all the way. And I think that was ultimately what caused me to crash so hard is, at a point I had this very unpleasant psychological experience where I realized how, I had a very job-like experience of realizing how much is going on and how complicated it would be to even try and understand it all, just enough to get it right, just to walk that fine path without straying a little bit on your own, because there's so much you don't know, how could you possibly stay on that path? And it completely overwhelmed me. And that was the only point where I was finally able to then accept that a sacrifice was necessary. Because if you could grasp everything you would have to do to meet God, you would feel completely incapable of it. Yeah, that's true. I think you're gonna have a, you've got a good imagination. I think you're a very vivid image-filled imagination. You're gonna probably do well in film. I hope so, yeah. If I can find the right pathways and the right people to sidestep all the politics and all the ideology to actually tell a story. There will always be that. There has always been, there will always be. I mean, people look at, it's so funny because artists can sometimes be so, I've got my vision. When I tell them my vision, they're all gonna swoon. It's like, no, they're not. Right. Every now and then. So what kind of film do you like? What are some of your inspirations for this vision? I guess my inspirations, I like anything with a monomyth. So I love Star Wars. I love Lord of the Rings. There are a lot of smaller Christian fantasy epics that I've read that also greatly inspired me. One of them was called Binding of the Blades. I don't even know if it's in print anymore, but this gentleman wrote a five volume book that was just an excellent cosmology of the entire Christian narrative, but set in a completely different world. And sort of a, I would say mid to high fantasy. So you had magic and everything, but you were in this very dark time. It's an excellent work. And then in film, I have sort of a weird list of inspirations. I really like Nolan and Nolan's work. Mostly because his movies aren't interesting until the second or third watch, especially his best works. Like Prestige, you can watch and just sort of move on from, but if you watch it two or three times, it gets deeper and deeper. And I love that sort of storytelling ability to satisfy the surface level audience, satisfy the desire for some action, some compelling visuals. But the longer you watch it, the more you explore the themes, the deeper it goes. But I also, I sort of despise heady films that are sort of way up in the clouds. And yeah, you can get it, but it doesn't do anything to bring it down to sort of the common man. Yep, yep, yep. So whenever I'm talking with my film from Zoe, is explaining it as like seven levels of storytelling and films should sort of try to gap from seven to one if they can. Like that's the ideal film. So, yeah. And then Christian influences in film. I have a real antagonistic view towards Christian film. That's actually how I got into film school. It was very funny. I criticized Christian film heavily so that I could talk about why I liked Martin Scorsese's last Temptation of Christ so much. And then I found out that one of my interviewers had worked on multiple Pure Flix films, and that was his entire career. So I had insulted the person interviewing me and somehow they let me in. But yeah, I really, I like when non-Christian people take on Christianity in earnest. There's a film, The Gospel According to St. Matthew. And I'm not the biggest fan of that film, but I love the story behind it. And I can't remember the filmmaker's name who did it, but he was banned by the Pope, I believe. And he wasn't allowed to, or no, I think he was cast out of the church if he was part of the church, but his films and his works were definitely banned by the church. Wow. And he was a homosexual director and he was very antagonistic towards the church. And then at some point, someone sort of threw him the idea of doing a Christ story and he was very disinterested. And then at some point he just sat down and started reading the gospels again and thought, if I can just one for one, like do the gospel of Matthew without any sort of, mythology or anything that's built up over the last 2000 years, just this story, it would be a really great story. And then he made one of, at the time, one of the best films about Christ and the Pope raved about it and loved it. And it's this really interesting film that just sort of goes, well, this would have been very mundane, some of these events. It would have shocked the people, but the people were so street level that they wouldn't have even known how to react to these things. And so he films this very just, almost drab, like there's just no pageantry to it. It's just very earnest. And he just picked people off the street to play all of the biblical figures. So everybody has an every man sort of look. And I find movies like that just really interesting or like Scorsese's Last Temptation, I thought, was one of the most interesting films about Christ because it can take someone who's completely against Christianity and take them down this journey they've never considered. That's not the gospels, but brings them right back to the point of the gospels right at the end. And it was the first film about Christ I ever watched that really brought me to tears and broke me down. Wow. Well, you were, I remember when that film came out and it was, it caused quite a stir. And of course, in my younger rebellious years, I thought, I gotta go see that film. I went to the theater, there's Christian's protest. I get like, I'll go in. Yeah. And I actually found the film, you know, I wasn't offended by it. And I actually found it quite, I found the premise of the story quite engaging because I thought, well, of course, you know, Jesus would be tempted to forsake his mission. Isn't this what many of us are tempted to do in our daily lives to, you know, to tell the cross to get out of here. I wanna have a nice life and dog on it. I've, you know, I'm entitled to it. So, you know, take all that cruciform stuff and sell it someplace else to some other rubes. So, no, that's, no, I'm with you. I'm with you. I hadn't heard of that movie, you know, while you were talking, I just Googled it. And it 1964, is that it? Or is it, or is it different? Was it Italian? It was Italian. I wanna say it was like 1939 or- Oh, even older. There's a very early film. Let me see if I can pull it up real quick. Oh, no, I guess it was 64. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Pazzolini. Yeah. Yeah. Interesting. I'll have to, you know, now with the internet, I mean, you can, I mean, I had the same thing for your book recommendation there. I immediately went to Amazon and, you know, beyond the summer land, binding of the blade, book one, Kindle for three bucks. So, there you go. Anybody wanna buy it? I'm gonna buy it. I'm gonna buy it. I'm gonna buy it. I'm gonna buy it. I'm gonna buy it. I'm gonna buy it. I'm gonna buy it. There you go. Anybody who wants to read it, it's out there for three bucks. You can get started. It looks kind of like a, you know, sword and sorcery type thing. And, oh, very interesting. Very interesting. There's just so many, there's just so many good books out in the world to look for and to read. And, oh, that's very, very cool. It's very, very cool. So, what's happening with Sherry's group? So, you've had a couple of meetings together and? Yeah. Right now, we're just sort of, we've had two meetings and we're sort of just laying the foundations of what our schedule's gonna look like. So, we're gonna meet twice a week, or sorry, twice a month. And we're getting that all worked out. And then we're trying to figure out, cause we have, I think 15 to 20 people right now. And they're from all different artistic backgrounds. So, just incredible people in there and just a wide variety of ages and backgrounds. So, it's even just introducing ourselves and discussing, it's been great, the variety that's there. There's sort of a genuine diversity in it and a diversity of thought and exploration that in every film group that I've been a part of, that's for film criticism, I don't find that much diversity of thought or background. Yep. So, that is the most exciting thing to me, that I could get some actual criticism and valuable feedback on what is and isn't working. So, it's been phenomenal. And then our last session, we were talking about censorship and the tendency for artists who do have a faith background and are exploring their faith in the work to have to censor themselves and that problem of self-censoring that we do, which it's really hard in this day and age to really know which is the bigger problem, the censorship that's coming down from above or the self-censoring that you do, which is more harmful. So, I told them a story about my experience at film school, trying to pitch a religious film and just like the sort of bizarre response that I received and sort of the immediate shutdown and all the feedback I got, all the questions I got, were sort of clearly not the right questions to ask. They were just blocks to try and keep the pitch from going forward. And so, yeah, we've been discussing that. And yeah, I don't know, it's been phenomenal for me so far, just getting to hear from everyone. Good. Yeah. Good. I'm glad and part of my own journey over these last three years, helping these kinds of groups start for me is one of the most exciting things because right away I knew just being a pastor that if everything has to go through me, it'll very quickly become a bottleneck. And then Sherry showed up and it's like, I wanna start this group. And I said, well, let's put out a call and we'll shop it on the Discord and see who's out there. And a group of about 20 is about the right size for something like this. You know, not everybody's gonna stick, but out of it, you'll probably get 10 to 12 who are down and you're right about the diversity. One of the things that has been true and that I've learned in all of this, both in my local meetups and in the Discord has been the Jordan Peterson group tends to attract people who are low in agreeableness, which means you'll get more honest feedback. People will be more willing to tell you what they think to sort of penetrate this veneer of nice that sort of pervades the culture. And so it's just been a delight. I mean, when I started the YouTube channel, or at least decided not to shut it down after my Jordan Peterson video started, I was prepared for a few hundred views and a couple of new conversation partners. That was my expectation. And I got a lot more than that. And I wasn't sure I wanted more than that because I've got a life. I don't really need to be famous. Truth be told, being famous and having your email box, inbox clogged up is kind of a pain. And so a lot of this has been trying to figure out how to mitigate the effects of dealing with a large audience. But at the same time, Jesus had a much more present larger audience when he's got thousands around him. That's much more difficult to deal with. So I'm just tickled pink that people have picked up on this and Sherry is getting to pursue this. And I couldn't be happier. Yeah, well, I really love the way you're doing it that you are redirecting that energy. And people are coming to you and you're creating these opportunities for people to continue without it having to reinforce your channel or anything like that. It's nice to see. It's really nice to see how community oriented you are. Oh, you'll get the lawyers writing you for the Paul VanderKley, you know, oh, you've got to get Paul VanderKley residuals. Yeah. No, I want to bless the world. And when I, you know, just meeting you today and talking to you, to me it's tremendously encouraging because human beings are, what one person can do in this world is just amazing. And you're young and you know, you're going to figure stuff out and you're going to fail. And you know, but you're going to do stuff. And so it's, to me, it's just exciting to have just one little part of encouraging you and seeing what you and others will do. And I think it's actually quite exciting that the, I know Sherry was doing visual arts type things. A lot of arts are visual, but you doing cinema. I know others were looking at music. So there is a real diversity. And, you know, again, part of what's, part of what you want to do when you're young is build a network, but you want it, I mean, part of the problem with something like film school is you're all too much the same. And then they kind of put you in a corral and it's very resource intensive with certain kinds of resources, but not with other resources and not with other people. And what I found is that often you need lots of different kinds of people. You know, you need accountants and you need jerks and you need super happy people. I mean, you just need a whole bunch of different kinds of people. Like there are people and if you actually get it, and churches are actually sort of good at that because they attract different kinds and then they clump up in families, which again increases the diversity. And so it actually works pretty well. And a lot of these really smart systems that we think, oh, we want all thoroughbreds of this kind of person. Well, you know, if you're building a farm and you want to grow food, you probably don't want a lot of thoroughbreds. You probably want some workhorses and some donkeys and you know, some cows. So it's good. I've dominated this and I don't know if you had anything you wanted to talk about. So I'll shut up now. I mean, no, this has been great because I wasn't sure what I wanted to talk about. And you've steered the conversation very, very well. One thing I would like to ask about and this shows how little I've gotten through your work so far, but this idea of the estuary, can you talk to me a little bit about that? Cause I find that very compelling and it seems like it should be a natural part of a church, but it seems to be the part that when the church starts to clam up, it's the part it despises the most. Yes. So this sort of, the reason you found me is, well, I don't know how many times I've told my story on my channel. So I was, how far do I go back? So I'm pastoring this local church in Sacramento, California, like many churches, it's got a fair number of older people. The church isn't dramatically successful in terms of evangelism or bringing in young people or young families and the church is basically dying. And I've always been interested in, I've got a lot of books behind me. I like ideas, I like books. I'm very high in openness. I didn't know that until Jordan Peterson, big five, high in openness. Oh, that's what I am. But I was always interested in ideas and I was doing some writing and I was writing for doing some writing for certain things and thinking about writing. And then I was, I'm a little too ADHD to have actually pulled off a book yet. But I was thinking about that. And I have some colleagues who, the usual thing that pastors do for books is they take all of their sermons and they dump them in a book. And so you bless or curse the world twice with your sermons. But I was thinking about books and I said, most of the people in my church, well, they might buy my book because they're being nice to me as their pastor and my mom would buy one. But I don't know how many people would read it because how many people read books? And I thought, why do people watch videos and movies and things? So, and then one member of my church named Freddie, if you go on my channel and you scroll down a few, you'll find the Freddie and Paul show. And there's a playlist for the Freddie and Paul show. So you can see this actually predates any of my Jordan Peterson videos. And, you know, I once or, you know, once a month or every other month, I would before COVID take Freddie out to lunch and we'd have very interesting conversations, just me and Freddie. And I always thought, you know, it's too bad these aren't recorded because boy, the world would hard, truth is stranger than fiction. And then Freddie says to me one day, he says, Pastor Paul, me and you should do a TV show. I thought, see, I know he had gone down to public access TV and I wasn't about to do that. So I said, I'll tell you what, Freddie, I'll take my smartphone here and I'll just take a little video of us talking. It'll be kind of a variety show, usually does a wrap and we usually get local sports and a few other strange things. And I said, I'll record it and I'll post it on YouTube and we can watch it. And that was, you know, and a few other, his mom and some of my family members, you know, if you get 10 or 15 views, watching the Freddie and Paul show. And then Jordan Peterson came along and I thought, you know, there's something about YouTube and Jordan Peterson here. And I didn't really have any, YouTube was a place that you could post sermons if you wanted to give a link to someone in church to watch them or cat videos. I had no idea that YouTube was really a social network as well as sort of a video facilitation thing. So I thought there's something about Jordan Peterson and YouTube and so I made a video, something like three reasons why this pastor thinks Jordan Peterson is important. And again, I thought I was gonna get maybe a hundred views because most of the Freddie and Paul show got five to 15 views. So it was kind of the speed of my YouTube channel. So I'll get a hundred views or something like this. And I got way more than a hundred views and I'm like, oh boy. And emails started rolling in and all of this stuff started to happen. And it's like, oh boy, what do I do now? But I'm a pastor, so I go months between someone coming up to me and wanting a conversation about something that really outside the church, that's something that really mattered in their life. And I had more invitations to conversation than I had time for. So I thought, you know, and then some local people were watching my videos and they were saying things like, well, you really should start a meetup. I'd heard of meetup.com. So I thought, all right, let's start a meetup. I'll go to meetup, I'll spend my 80 bucks, which is kind of a ripoff for six months and I'll put a little thing out there. And I expected two or three people to come. And I would have been happy with that because we would have sat down and had a nice conversation. That probably would have been the end of it. That's what I thought. Because that had been my experience with church. And a dozen people showed up. I was like, oh. And I didn't have the foresight to figure out how to dismiss these people. So we were still talking at 1.30 in the morning and the church phone rang. And I knew exactly who was calling at 1.30 in the morning to the church phone. It was my wife. She's like, where are you? What's going on? So then I had to figure out how to dismiss people after the meetup. And so then, well, I'll do it again next month. And about 15 people showed. Some people came back, a lot of new people. And so I started doing it every month. And one of the things that I realized was I've always been frustrated as a pastor because churches have this veil of orthodoxy, dogma. And that's important. That's an important function of a church. And churches need that. But it was also frustrating because I knew people weren't telling the truth in church. And not in some theological sense, but they had doubts. And so usually what happens in church, when someone gets upset about something or they don't believe it anymore, they just ghost, they just leave, they just disappear. And sometimes as a pastor, you go track them down and then you knock on their door and they feel maybe a little guilty, but you know, this is, and as a pastor, you're like, just talk to me. Tell me the truth, please. And I don't care if you want to say I'm a jerk and my preaching sucks and Jesus as a con and the church just wants you. I don't care what you tell me. Just tell me the truth. And it's remarkably hard to get that. And so, but at the meetup, most of the people coming to the meetup, they're not church people at all. And they walk in the building and they would tell me the truth. Cause you know, they weren't gonna lose status in the church by saying anything that the whole community wouldn't like to hear. So they just came into the church and they just told me what they thought. And I told them what I thought. And I thought I've always wanted the church to be a place where this can happen. And you know, I was thinking in terms of, and I'd actually thought about this idea for a while. And you know, so I'd been doing my YouTube channel for a while and some people were getting a little bothered because they're sort of expecting me to somehow roll out some new effort and some new institution. And I'll be the CEO and you know, I'm gonna quit my day job in the church and I'm gonna lean hard into Patreon. And you know, I'm gonna figure out a way that it'll be Paul VanderKlay, well not ministries, it's Little Duke Church, it's supposed to be the Paul VanderKlay show or something. And I was like, I'm not gonna do that. Because I think actually, because I am a pastor and I do love my day job. And a lot of what people actually do appreciate about my channel has a lot to do with the fact that I am a pastor, but the church is just a little too confining and we need a space outside the walls of the church where people can speak their truth. And people in the church need to hear that and people out of the church need to see that there's a space like this. And so I called it an estuary with the idea that you've got kind of the chaotic salt water of the sea mixing with the fresh water and estuaries are very productive ecosystems. And so I started using that term. And so sort of like Sherry, a friend of mine, John Van Donk has a group of about 15 people who are wanting to start estuaries or already have estuaries of sorts. And I haven't really pushed this idea too hard, partly because what I want to see is exactly what happened in Sherry's case. That she got an idea for a vision and then, hey, I've got a few thousand people watching my videos. I'll use that to say, this is Sherry. She's not a nut job. She's a, oh, she might be a little nutty. I don't know. You might think that, I don't care. But if you're interested in having conversations with a broad group of people that at least seem to be inspired at least by this flag that is Jordan Peterson, call her and let's see what she can do with it. And same thing has happened with John Van Donk and the same thing has happened with the Bridges of Meeting Discord server. That grew out of our local meetup. And so the thing has just sort of grown organically in that way, which is exactly what I wanted because sort of the corporate way of growing, in order to grow in a corporate way, you do need thoroughbreds and you do need to systematize and you do need to do all those things. And there might come a day that I want to do some more of that. But for now, I'm still the pastor of my local church. And I want to see how many other things I can inspire. And then let's see what takes because before this, my first gig out of seminary, I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic and I worked with pastors and they were very entrepreneurial and often, so in every church, there was a pastor and a preacher and often there'd be a conflict between the two and then the preacher would go out and start his own church. And so then he'd get his own preacher and the pastor would get a new preacher. And I watched the Haitians do this in the Dominican Republic and I said, you know, there's something to this. And so a lot of missionaries sort of tried to get everybody in straight jackets and clean up messes. And I would be much more free to let them make messes. And every now and then, if there was a mess that got really bad, I would step in. But, and then when I got to Sacramento, I was involved with church planting. It was very much the same way. Let, you know, get some things out into the world, encourage them, support them, give them a little bit of nutrition, see what develops. Because in that way, the world is too big and too mysterious for us to know. And really the only way to know anything is to sort of Petri dish things and see what grows. And yeah, there'll be some heresy and yeah, there'll be some messes and, you know, but just try and let it not get too bad. You know, again, let them, you might fall 15 or 20 feet, but not a hundred. Let's keep a rope on it and not let it get too bad, but definitely let people fall. And so estuary sort of grew out of that. And before COVID, I was, because I'm a minister in a denomination and we have churches sort of in many major urban areas. I was sort of doing a tour with Job and John Van Donk. And so I'd call a pastor in a city and say, hey, I'm coming to your town. Can I have a room this evening? Almost always churches have empty rooms. Be like, oh, sure, no problem. And then let people know on my video channel, I'm gonna be at your place. Come on out and meet me. And usually I try to get the pastor and say, now, I don't, I'm not always this blunt, but what I really wanna say is don't be an idiot. I'm gonna bring five or 10 people who are never darkened the door of your church ever. They might not ever in the future, but they're coming to explore meaningful conversations. And they'll probably stand a better chance of telling you the truth than most of the people that are already in your church for very legitimate reasons. But you might want to come to this meeting and get to know them and figure out how to begin to build a relationship with them. So that's what I've been doing. And COVID kind of interrupted it all, but all right. So all this video stuff I do anyway, which is COVID safe. So here is what I'm doing. Yeah. I think that idea is so incredibly interesting to me because it seems like at least here in the U.S., it's probably different depending on what country you're in. But the thing that I've always seen missing in any church that I've been a part of is where do the people who are not part of the church go to get a taste to see whether they like it or not and how far they want to go in. And when I first heard this term estuary, I assumed it meant the courtyard around the temple where the Gentiles would come in. And sort of just a place where you don't have to get all the dogma correct. You don't have to get all the rituals and rites correct. You can just explore from a safe distance. And I've never seen, in my experience, a church pull that off. But I don't even think any church is really aiming for that. It's either get people in to become members quick or have a steady audience. Like you either have the mega church or you have the church that if somebody who's a real outsider comes in, they're either not talked to or bombarded with all of this sort of churchies. And over the course of the few times they attend sort of push to do all these steps. But the idea of like, well, if there was a place where people could just sit and watch maybe from outside the room and debate what's going on in the church, that creates a very interesting space for people to explore for, like you say, there can be heresy, there can be people getting it wrong, but at least they're allowed to be part of the conversation now. And they're building the networks, they're building the relationships with, because part of the problem with churches is that they get so insular. That, well, people have relationships, they have their business relationships, they have all these other relationships, but a lot of churches are like, invite your friends to church. And a lot of people are like, there's no way I'm gonna invite my friends to church. They're gonna think I'm weird because they are not gonna understand. And actually, 40 years ago, the seeker movement really played with a lot of these ideas and had seeker services, but that was really much more of a sort of a rehashing of revivalism where you went to the seeker service and they had cool music and the preaching was usually a little above par, but it tended to be, it was usually wisdom preaching, which was sort of working another angle, which wasn't dumb, but it tended to be overly evangelistic. And so in that way, it was sort of in continuation with a revival movement. And in my meetup groups, I don't lean on anyone to, yeah, if you wanna come to church, we're here on Sunday morning, most people walking in have an idea, yeah, I have a suspicion what they do here on Sunday and I'm not interested, okay. But sometimes they kind of sneak in because they're a little curious because they see me at the meetup and then they're like, well, what is this on Sunday? And even with my, so I have my main YouTube channel, but then there's also the church channel and a lot of people might take a peek over there, but what's happening in church, that's not really where they're at now or yet or maybe ever. And that's the thing that the church has to deal with. And that's actually something that I do a lot of thinking about, but haven't really acted on because my day job right now, for the most part, continues to be caring for my present congregation. Many of the people are in their 80s and 90s and they have invested their entire life for their own Christian care and comfort and I'm their pastor and I'm going to continue to do that. But this church has also been very generous with my time because they see the value of what I'm doing out here. And if they say, well, how does this connect with this? I'll say, I don't really know, but I, you know, God can do crazy things. So as long as I find this to be fruitful, and it has been, I'll keep doing this, but I still keep doing this because that's my calling and these are my people and they're my church family and almost many of them are older than I am and I'm going to bury them. Now, when they're all gone and there's no longer this church here, well, I'll figure that out when that day comes. It hasn't come yet because some people who watch my videos, and I tell them, well, here's the church giving website because if Living Stones goes belly up, I'm gonna have some more decisions to make. But again, I don't think I'm stopping what I'm doing over here because I see this as fundamental to the future of the church, but I don't know what that looks like yet. Interesting, interesting. Yeah, I think that's just such a great way to tackle it. Yeah, I'm very impressed with your approach. And as somebody who doesn't really wanna be in church and is trying to step back that way, having your work available to just digest and not feel like I'm being preached to or lectured to or any of that is very helpful because I can still digest the ideas and reflect on at least the wisdom of Christianity, at least that much. So I'm very thankful for what you're doing. Thank you, thank you. Well, are times about up, any last ditch, that you got a website or a YouTube channel you wanna promote? I'm not sure that it would appeal to the crowd, but I do have a YouTube channel, Danny Voiles Presents, where I occasionally throw up short films that aren't gonna go to festivals. So that- Danny Voiles Presents? Yes. Okay. Yeah. All right, cool. Go ahead. I do have one question. I am not really sure how I'm gonna find my way back into church and maybe in some sense, I'm overthinking it and it doesn't matter, but I find myself needing to be in a place where I can explore Christianity and have discussions. And I want to be in church to plant myself somewhere to grow, but I don't wanna be somewhere where I feel that I'm just fulfilling a set of tasks, that I'm just going through the steps of what church is. Yeah. Do you have any suggestions for me in that situation? I be honest and forthright with any, I mean, church shopping is always difficult because you kind of go around. See, find churches that if you visit a church and it doesn't look too scary and maybe promising, I'd look for smaller rather than larger churches just because the pastors are more available. And then go to the pastor and say, would you be willing to have lunch with me? And see if he can do lunch or coffee with the pastor. I think, again, I mean, I'm not gonna say anything bad about large churches because they very much have their place, but they're very different animals than churches of less than 200 people. And churches of less than 200 people, the music isn't gonna be as good, the preaching isn't gonna be as good, there's gonna be some kookiness involved and there might be a little bit of tyranny involved and there'll be some dysfunction. There'll be all that stuff in a church, but most of those churches are probably so overwhelmingly desperate, they'll bend themselves in pretzels to accommodate some young person that shows any interest at all. And then just be honest with the church about this is where I am, this is who I am. And in my experience, most good pastors and good churches will let you be you. And part of the problem is that people will, and there are churches that won't. And if the church won't, nope, then that's not the place for you because they haven't made space for you. And you don't have to make demands on them, but they should try at least meet you. I've seen a lot of dying churches that had some young person come in and the church didn't like that person's sexuality, the person didn't share that person's taste in music or arts or Bible reading or anything, but that church just loved that person because he was their person. It might be a heretic, it might be all kinds of things wrong with them, but they felt validated that this person would actually do them the honor of recognizing them and being a part of their community. So I'd say, you see, most of the time when people church shop, you'll go out on the internet and you'll search websites. And that's a pretty good idea. You can get a sense of what churches are. But most churches, even fairly good ones that I know have really crappy websites because there's nobody in the church that can really make a good one. And they don't have any money to do that. And they're mostly sort of taking care of themselves. And so they're a little hard to get into, but with a lot of those churches, once you get into them, you do have real community. And again, it's a process. So I'd say, be patient, but above all, be honest about who you are. And when you get a chance to talk to someone, the pastor or an elder or someone who even showed any interest in you, just say, this is who I am, this is what I do. And if they're open to that, well, then you've got to start and see where it goes. That would be my philosophy because the, it's just a myriad of dogmas and traditions and styles and all that stuff is out there. But in a good church, they will treat you like an individual and they will value your presence. And that's at least a place to begin. Okay, yeah, excellent. Thank you so much. And thank you for your time. Oh, you're welcome. See, I have a full believer in providence. So, and I'm glad, I'm glad, you know, I, yeah, I can say hi to Nate myself, but I'm glad Nate showed it to you and I'm glad the slot was open. So this was great. Yeah, fantastic. Thank you so much. All right, take care. All right, bye-bye.