https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Qu2CilkaF0w

 Now this is this is Paul and Nick the Paul and Nick show Episode but Nick just asked me how the Australia trip was and the trip was great So that's not a lot of very interesting people had wonderful hosts the conference went Well, it was recorded. We'll post it at some point Well, it was all good. It's just the So now getting back we had a we had a delay getting back had an extra day in Melbourne with The airline had a the emergency lights didn't work and the plane were supposed to take from Melbourne to to Hawaii And it's like we're going over the Pacific. So what if the emergency lights don't work? It's going down, baby Those emergency lights take it out a lot Not can't fly without them and so Wound up flying a day later, but it was all good. It was fine. Nice they gave you a little bit of scrunch on the Getting back into your normal routine. Yeah. Yeah Yeah, that's just the way it goes. And then of course, I didn't have a preacher lined up for the next Sunday so then it's all right gotta gotta get a sermon out quick and Talk to people and I'm still I'm way behind on email and No, I was caught phone calls after return. It's just it's just the way it always is coming back from being away So I don't I don't have elves that manage things for me. Well, it's Yeah, I didn't have to do all those normal things for a couple weeks, but now they're all waiting but that's just Still there for you. Yeah. Yeah. How are you doing? I'm doing pretty good Couple minor things that happened in the last week I backed into a car in my neighborhood. That was fun My battery died in the car in the same car so trying to get that Patched up and see if I can get a little bit more life out of it But yeah minor minor normal life stuff. Yeah normal things of life normal things of life Well, we we got we ran out of time last time and we were we were I just I just listened to the last Well, I was hurriedly setting up my little studio here in my in my son's room. I Was like don't go to work or do I do it's here. It's like I don't have time to go to work I'll do this here. So you you had You had you had your experience with the and I'll just put a link to the second conversation that we did you had your Experience with the the being of light you had your ups and downs with diabetes You got out of the the pine cone company. Yes That was an interesting thing that happened recently too on Friday I ran into the owner Oh really? Yeah, and we had a very brief we were in a very loud setting so it was hard to have an actual conversation but uh, yeah, it was interesting he he went back in and and Started running the company again and got rid of the guy that I was having issues with Wow, which was like a nice little Confirmation I guess I wasn't totally yeah. Yeah off the mark there. Yeah But yeah, that was interesting Yeah, so and we were yeah we were right about to go into the cult for experience Number four yes, and this one's this one's probably the only way, you know All the others were kind of I Showed up somewhere and it happened to be a cult then I then dealt with whereas this one I actually entered into consciously hmm and And they were the consciously enter into a cult they branded themselves as a cult Which was certainly And usual forces a lot more yeah, it's unusual first of all it also forces a lot more conscious choice in what you're doing Truth and advertising that's good. Yeah. Yeah. Well Well, what what what do they how did they advertise themselves as a cult and what draws people to join them or what drew you? to join them so I Been thinking about how to structure this it's a bit tricky because there's not much of a narrative because There was no events in a sense that I can kind of use as markers Just because it was all online and so it's just thousands of micro interactions, so it's a little bit harder for me to form a story out of it that is easy to communicate I Did want to spend a little bit more time kind of going over that that burning hot phase that as I call it Just because I was kind of rushed at the end of the last one there and that was a really Important experience in my life and that's kind of what set me down this you know a divergent Pathway, okay. Okay. So go ahead with your plan Cool, yeah, I'll try I'm it's a lot less organized for this one So we'll see if it ends up making sense or not, but I have a horrible list of notes that are terribly Organized so What I guess one of the parts I wanted to kind of hit on was The Connection and I thought it was interesting when when I came across Peterson and he talked about burning off Deadwood. Mm-hmm and You know, I've described described this Experience as burning very hot for a long time You know years before I ever came across Peterson and I thought it was really interesting because I was like oh I know what that Experience is that he's the this burning of Deadwood. Mm-hmm And that's what I Feel like that's what triggered this Experience was going to that festival and Realizing so much of what I had built my persona on was Fake For lack of a better word and it created this this oh, I need to like strip an enormous amount of My persona and and I Mean granted it also this burning of Deadwood I you know, I don't think he's talked about this much but it really does it produces an enormous amount of energy You know, it's heat it's a side effect of the getting rid of it So, yeah and and like he had said, you know I forget which video it was in but you know, you may find yourself burning away 99% of Of what you thought you were or your persona in the in this process and that was very much where I You know, it's particularly when I cooled back down It was like there was nothing there anymore. I didn't know what was left And then I wanted to to kind of expand a little bit on how I've tried to make sense of that experience and You know verveky talks a bit about and and a lot of other people people have referenced it but the the flow state and Probably the easiest way I could describe what that feeling was like is like a permanent flow state So normally flow states are pretty hard to achieve and it requires a lot of variables to be kind of perfectly balanced with each other so we kind of enter into it say we're playing music and we Get into the song and we kind of let go of ourselves into the music itself and we enter that flow state or some activity Or meditation or prayer. Yeah this was like I couldn't exit it I couldn't go back to a Lower state of energy. Yes, exactly and Yeah, so that's one way to think about it What and then kind of that transition I was experiencing with the being of light like And I wanted to tie this more deeply into what I saw with the the X that I talked about in her Process where it felt like she entered a burning hot phase And then it lettered down into this, you know Psychological issues. Yeah, and how I could feel myself doing that before before this experience And what it felt like was was I was receiving a Tremendous amount of energy coming in through the top end of the body. So like through it almost felt like my eyes Very clearly And what it felt like was that the energy couldn't ground itself Exit the body so as it was coming in it was I was getting stuck in kind of solipsistic Loops in my head and I couldn't Get rid of the energy fast enough that it you know I was getting stuck in kind of solipsistic loops in my head and I couldn't Get rid of the energy fast enough that it you know It's hard hard experiences to describe But I feel like that was what was like that kind of driving me crazy part and You know in many ways I feel like I just got lucky in that I found that if I submitted myself Allowed some amount of that energy to flow through the rest of me and exit Whereas with her, you know, she didn't have a mechanism for that to happen you know there wasn't enough of a honestly a religious foundation or Practices that you could you know people that have experienced these states Had learned how to deal with them and how to you know integrate them really Yeah, so and that was the distinct feeling when I got the touch on the forehead was like Suddenly all the energy dropped down through my body So it was building up building up in the head and then upon that that event It was finally allowed to enter the you know lower parts of the body and flow out You know, it's almost like ground like when you get hit with electricity Right a sense right if you have a grounding then it passes through you But if you don't have a grounding it all starts Reverberating in the body and gets trapped and then you burn to a crisp Well, is that true or that isn't that Birds on the phone wire they don't burn because they're not grounded if it's if it flows through you then you have the conductive problem right if you create ground if you're on an aluminum ladder on a on an electrical wire, then you're in real trouble because You're the you're actually connected to a try and when you get hit with lightning for example It takes the the electricity takes the shortest path possible to the ground So it's I understand the metaphor that you're using how would goes with electricity I think is actually a little different and I'm sure someone in the comments actually will correct the both of us. So hopefully My understanding here is a metaphorical at best we should say I understand what you're saying. Okay good The other part of that experience I should touch on and it I Noticed I mean part of it I was rushing through it because we were running out of time and the other part was I wanted to Keep myself Humble or stay in a state of humility and in the process of doing that I might have actually Degraded that experience a little bit. Okay, which I don't want to make that mistake But What it felt like was a a kind of Kind of an overwhelming sense of of love hmm, and It's it's I don't like it's hard for me to use even that description because when we say the word love it gets It's a loaded word, right? It's attached to so many Things that Weren't what this experience was like And you know, I had I'd watched the recent interview you did with Tim was it Tim or Tom Tim? Yeah with the violin. Yes. Yes. Yes and how he was describing this oceanic experience of of love and that's Again I'm trying to like break down an experience that happened in seconds That was so voluminous, you know that it's it's hard to Parse it out linearly But you know, I mean Yeah, it suddenly Christianity and the the the Mythological strut or not even mythological the structure of it what it's trying to do to the person's subconscious suddenly You know made a tremendous amount of sense like for instance a thing that had bothered me for ages about Christianity You know again without really having understood it or or even made a solid attempt to try and understand it was the concept of original sin that you you know, you're born into sin and then So you end up By trying to reject that you end up in a sense always trying to Rationalize away your own sins or your you know areas where you know You've messed up and you start trying to load the world with the responsibility of Your own actions, right? And it was this experience of overwhelming love and acceptance That actually gave me the bravery in a sense to be incriminated and that combination of allowing myself to admit and own my take well take Responsibility for my what I knew to be wrong Combined with being absolutely accepted even in that wrongness was Absolutely liberating. Mm-hmm, which was confusing right because it only to me It always felt like accepting original sin was this heavy, you know The opposite of a liberating experience and I was trying to go around liberating myself by blaming everything on on you know everything else Tim Tim Keller has this saying I don't have it quite right, but it basically amounts to you you have to be happy in Really? I think it's happy. It's really happy and secure in just the right way to Basically be miserable in just the right way Yes, and it's it's exactly that that kind of putting things together that I am and you know This this has been done for me. And so it's secure To a degree that I now may engage and look at what should deeply bother me I mean you kind of need those two together exactly. Well, then you end up in like a chicken and egg Problem to yep, and this actually I don't know. I don't understand much about the different denominations of Christianity Again, my my personal route has been trying to make it personal which comes with all its you know mess-ups and everything but the Calvinist what I think correct me if I'm wrong, but the Calvinist view of the Kind of absolute sovereignty of God or it right it's God that's Saving you you don't have the ability to do it on your your own and that what I Experienced was very much in line with that which is that like you can't start the process You can ask for it, right? You can like open yourself up saying I want this but you yourself can't actually originate the The place where you can even own your own, you know your own Responsibility or anything it has to be given to you as a gift. Yep. Yep. Yep And right and that's another part it's like we're incapable of loving God in a sense Yeah, you know where even more broadly we're incapable of love all together we can Channel the the love that God has for the world, but we don't get to be the the Origination point of it. We don't get to be what creates it and again, you end up in that chicken or egg problem and that was the immediate experience was like It wasn't even my job to love God It was the automatic reaction to being loved by God, right? Like I don't you know, you don't have a choice in the matter you just Give it back, right? right yeah and in fact, I you know, I was just ready to I was gonna do a video this morning on Peterson at Liberty and then another video came out with Peterson and more talk with David Nassar and They got right to that point. That's kind of the point where the Calvin Calvinists and Arminians Which is actually a Calvinist heresy according to Calvinists But it's right at this point of and and it all has to circulate around Agency and what it means for God to act in the world and And a lot of it depends on which perspective you come at it towards and it's like you can't you You're not going to be able to get it right. So which side do you want to err on? Yeah Yeah, absolutely yeah, well and I noticed that I mean that's like what the difficulty is in trying to even explain the experience is you feel yourself making the The error towards one side of the paradox, right and so you can't quite ever Say what it actually is. It's very frustrating But I'm assuming that's why people are still talking about this Later, that's right the ineffable Ironically a launches a a river of words. Yes I keep trying to articulate the ineffable and by definition you can't can't yes the Apostle Paul So similar things about his experience you know his experience of drawn into heaven as the Apostle Paul says and You know words cannot you know, that's yeah, they stop working there stop working and but Still we must try and that's what we do now. You're exactly right. And that's actually a fun I've played around with that idea, but it's in a sense. It's highlighting Poetry in a sense over knowledge because our attempt now becomes a song right it much more so than it becomes a Literal description right, right. It's us Trying to honor the experience rather than us trying to Grasp and know the experience We it's it gets into a ton of the stuff that we've been talking about in the Peterson conversation Ian Ian McGillchrist in terms of the right brain in the left brain It's essentially saying this this is not something that this approach to language that is left brain description Propositions this cannot be contained in that and it also gets into the thing that Part of what we do with language when we use the word grasping is is we in a sense we colonize it But but to grasp means to be able to employ and and a big part of this It is that this is something we cannot employ. Yes now we are employed by it by it Yes, he really disturbs us because we don't We don't like that unless we submit to it But I mean and so all of this all of these issues that we have That theologians have been working on for for a very very long time It's all there and poetry more evokes and song more evokes Rather than this other use of language that we have which is to employ and the point is it can't be Employed by us us it's similar to the the dilemma of the ring and Tolkien where You know Barrow or you can't use it against its own creator. That's right Wheel this yeah, and and and Gandalf has to wrestle with that and gladriel has to wrestle with that And it's this limit that we have that we don't like but Absolutely Yeah, that's that's interesting Oh, man, I had a thought and then it left my head. I always have that problem. It's so frustrating Let me I'm trying to get get my spot back here. Yeah. Oh What I was good What I was gonna say is it it's the the tree of knowledge problem eating the the fruit from the tree of knowledge that's it's playing on that same thing and that's What's tricky about that experience of love is that it's? extremely specific Right. It's it's infinitely giant, but it's also so right. It's a it's like a universe You know, the universe is Endlessly enormous, but it's also extremely specific it forms itself into certain patterns and shapes Granted we can't in a sense get outside of those patterns and shapes But what this does is it makes it extremely enticing for us to try and codify the experience of love into a set of laws and rules so that we can emulate it without actually having to Live it or experience it in a sense. We might say we can Reproduce it without having to receive it. Yes. Yes, except that it doesn't actually work And that is always the dilemma of of love is that it is given and received But not taken you can't yes take love. Yeah Absolutely, and I can almost see then where You know in a sense right not in a sense Christ becomes necessary because he's the living expression of it. It's not What Judaism had in a sense kind of crystallized itself at that point into these rules and laws and you see that as like a tension between the figure of Christ and the the Judaic system that he was operating in where they're you know, he Does a healing on Sunday and then the Pharisees come and go that's against the law and it's like well what? what is the law you're following if it's not the active living expression of love So you and that's why Jesus keeps saying they're saying but the law not to heal on the Sabbath and Jesus keeps saying if you knew Moses you would recognize me and Because the law is an articulation and expression of that thing But it can't you know, it can't contain the thing. Yes. It's again It's similar to notified right your attempt to use words to try to express the thing But your words can't contain or grasp or employ the thing Yes, and in a sense even the attempt to codify it Pulls you out of the experience Yeah, you know, it's like you can't do both at once to some degree Or at least that's how I experienced it that the moment I actually used it as an escape from the experience to try and codify it You know, I was obsessed with theoretical physics as a teenager I mean all the way to the degree that I taught myself calculus by reading the textbook when I was 14 like I was certain that I was gonna be you know, a theoretical physicist, yeah, and You know eventually I came to the realization that or the way I described it was you know Appropriating God for the sake of man's technology is not like a Take right I wanted the experience that made me so curious about the universe to begin with much more so than I wanted to be able to Precisely describe it, you know codify it But in this case when the experience was getting too intense I was actually using physical theories to try and it not only explain what I was experiencing but to ground it in something in a sense to Give me some relief from it, you know, it's a terrifying place living from from there especially when you feel it start to get sporadic and you feel it start to Distort To some degree well and and that what you just described there is you can find that expressed in interesting places Charles Finney for one had this experience of God coming upon him and he You know, he asked to read that God would relent and you find this again and again in You know that I Hesitate to use the word mystical because there's a tradition that in a sense employs that I'm not trying to critique that in any way But again, we don't have words for these experiences but the kinds of things you're describing are quite common in the literature and and again, it's I think it's also connected with this idea that deeply bothers people where Christians where God says Well, you can't see my face or you will die. But to us that just sounds Your your you know, what what game are you playing on me? But when when you see it in the light of what you're describing you begin to realize no, I Can't handle this in the way. I can't handle a tornado or a hurricane or these are things that are are way beyond me and You know, so, you know Moses and the Cleft of the Rock There's a lot in the Bible about this and again the book of Revelation where even when the messenger shows up I mean John just loses his stuff and and this happens. It's almost a ritual People lose their stuff angel says be not afraid and you almost want to say to the angel Um, you know, we're kind of understanding it from this end But but it's you know, it could be that they just dial themselves down to the point where okay They're just at the they're just at that liminal space there threshold there Yeah Where because if they you know like in like in when they show up the three show up to Abraham, you know They can obviously come incognito if they want to but so there's just a ton here and A lot of it's in the Bible and yes Yes And Yeah, I mean that after that experience of course was when I first actually like Legitimately opened a Bible and started granted. I I didn't read the story through I used it basically this is probably my new age leanings coming through but I used it almost like a Oracle or something, you know, I would ask Before opening it like please show me something that I need right now Yeah and then I'd open it to a random spot and read what it was and then try and Integrate it into what I was experience plenty of non-christ non new age Christians do that all the time Sure you Using the Bible as a magic eight ball Lucky dip some some traditions call it I Okay, good, I'm yeah Not having having never put myself in a formal tradition it's hard to know how far on the Heretic scale I'm going off and you know, there are plenty of heretics in churches believe Yeah, so So that yes, that's what I was I was dealing with and I kind of ran through it with the job part You know because I was this was all happening over about a two month span and that was the same thing when I first started well first of when it finally Could kind of flow through me in a sense I could see it changing the people there changing the workspace and everything and I could feel them in a sense like almost waiting to see You know, like can you stabilize this? Is this who you are now? or is it gonna and right as it started to distort and weird things started happening and You know, that's when they were like, oh we need to put up a boundary You know, like it's not stable enough to trust it Which was a as far as I'm concerned a good decision because I wasn't You know able to stabilize that state and that leads me into cult for because what I saw with cult for was a person that had had this experience and Had integrated it far better than I had been able to had been able to Relax and stabilize it to a degree that I was incapable of and in a sense That's why I was like, oh, there's something here. I need to learn It granted also the timing of the events and how it all played out Kind of it felt like I was like being pushed that way for some reason and again, I didn't know if it was like you know, I Probably not in a good way Probably not in a good way. I'm a proud person in that. I don't like to follow others You know, like I want to figure it all out myself And so I even as I kind of entered into this I kept a lot of that mentality where it's like I'm either here to watch something to witness something or to Learn or both right? Maybe I need to learn certain parts and then be able to Keep my discernment enough to know which parts to throw away And actually, you know, I mean this is a recurring as far as I can tell a recurring story in the Bible as well Which is like, you know The people God chooses can't stabilize that state either Right. The only stable form of it you see is in Christ and everyone else they get the huge I mean even Moses right? It's like this huge flare-up of energy parts the sea and You know pulls the the Jews from Egypt and it's all these magnificent miracles taking place and Then he wanders the desert for 40 years and dies right before getting to his goal That's right. That's right And and lots of interesting little things in there where he strikes the rock when he's told to speak to it And where he you know, his face is shining you talk about energy his face is shining and this so disturbs the people you know, he veils it but another tradition talking about, you know veiling it because because it was beginning to diminish and There's there's a lot that goes on Yeah Oh, that's interesting and I know you're exactly right that that we see, you know, we see this We see this lived out in Christ perfectly But in the Bible Christ is the only you know full example everyone else Like all of us Fits and starts gets it wrong I mean since we're we're all on training wheels and we're toddlers in this. Yes. Yes, that is precisely the feeling is Yeah, and it's it's almost that constant reminder of like you always have the inclination to start trying to control it yourself Yes, and so it's like this regular Process of submission Over and over again. It's the moment you write It's almost like the moment you see yourself trying going off the path The proper response should be oh, of course, I can't freaking control that You know, of course, I can't handle a sun's worth of energy or a universe's worth of energy, you know That's right. That's right My own self-concept is way too delicate a structure to be able to Carry the weight of existence, you know Right when it when another human being insults us we you know You know our lobsters get a little smaller. Yes Absolutely, we're going to take on the maker of the universe. Yes, like Whoa naive can't begin to describe But that's how that's how small we are and this is a very But that's how that's how small we are and this actually gets into you know, the the Orthodox tradition talks about Talks about this a lot CS Lewis talks about how you know what God is It's not as it's not just what God is preparing for us to be around But what God is preparing for us to become yes is but again just like we started out This isn't something I'm gonna sit real hard and I'm gonna try this nor is it something that I'm completely off the hook Are completely irresponsible for no I am fully responsible Yeah, but also this is not something I can accomplish Yes, and both those things are true at the same time and we can't square that Yes. Yeah, the way I was describing it to myself was was you know the thing God made is Infinitely superior to the thing I could make out of what God made Yes, and so it was almost this attempt to again. It's it's both at once you you are taking absolute responsibility for you as part of What was created and yet? You're giving it all away At the same time and this actually pulled me into the idea of free will and That in a sense there is no such thing as free will because Rather the only the only choice free will has is what to give itself away to hmm, right That's the one choice that actually is for is is how do I give away my free will? Who do whom to whom do I give it to I could give it to myself But then what I end up doing is following my own self-concept Right. It's still not free just because I think it's contained inside of me. It's now operating on whatever you know Mechanisms you might want to put it on evolution or you know and The greatest irony being of course giving the free will back to God is the only place seemingly where it actually feels free That's again and if you read enough Christian literature, that's exactly the language that we use That we we give it back to God and suddenly see it's like the word free is too big for us But when we give it to God the freedom there actually Because we're too small for it. Then we actually Begin to and again, the words are hard begin now Then suddenly it's in the right place. Yes, and and that's why You know, there is freedom in God and people are always like yeah, but the rules know, but you don't Yeah, you know it's really hard to just sit down the rules are just how you naturally start acting through the experience of it it's in the again the Example of a universe being specific while also having infinite potential is definitely I Don't it's a way that it made sense to me Yeah, I don't know it's hard stuff to fit into words it is but it's it's really it's I you know I think it's helpful for us to talk about and share because These are the same places where theology I mean, it's interesting now that the materialists they're all hung up on free will and they in a sense in the materialist framework There's no space for free will yeah There's no space for free will yeah, and and if you see it from by way of the conversation We've just had it makes perfect sense There's no space in free will because there's no space in us to employ that freedom But as the critique of the the materialist is well, they can't even they can't live out their doctrine Because we can't help but exist within our framework without what we call free will So then the question is where does the freedom actually lie and and I think you've articulated that very well Yeah, well yeah, and again. Yeah, it's you're constantly finding At least I'm finding myself dancing on the two sides of a paradox in In that attempt to explain it and again you see that exact same thing ironically with the the hard materialists Any yeah, I don't know materialism is a weird one The consequence of working at home is my dog My daughter's dog and my daughter's cat that hopefully once my daughter gets back from college I get to here are your animals sweetheart care for them Oh and another point of connection I wanted to make with with the diabetes part of this story because you know some of the comments were like of course I expect a lot of this but the It didn't feel like it was a Spontaneous miracle healing or something like that What it felt like was that the diabetes itself was coming from a self rejection That was in a sense. I'd implanted in myself, and I think this was largely a response to to The experience I had with my ex where in many ways I had blamed myself For what had happened or my inability to to deal with it properly or to help this person properly or you know all those those types of things and I the part that felt truly healing was not like Necessarily a Miracle It's tricky because what does the word miracle mean? you know like or miraculous like why would why would you divorce it from the rest of the functioning of of the systems in place particularly as our our own physical theories actually leave plenty of room for these types of events to occur That's the that's I always Kovach when I hear people use the word supernatural because it's we've just we've just Conjured up this framework, which I think is really of very little service to us because We there's an assumption there that that is not really helping us it's hurting now no no well And it's again. It's like it kind of made sense when we were first discovering physical Theories that were very rigid in their formation, but once we get to a system like quantum physics It makes no sense to separate every you know There's so many areas where it makes no sense to create even the the concept of the supernatural as separate from the natural Even in the creation of a universe to begin with you know isn't that isn't the fact that there's nature supernatural then like It gives silly way to dichotomize you know events and this gets into of course for Vickie's ongoing conversation about you know the axial age and The The I think the the wrong way to go is to say okay. There is no top story There's just the secular frame and it's like no that doesn't really help us either because you just You have to cut out so much Well documented human experience Historically And you just simply have to dismiss it and now you're you've just consigned yourself to a little iron box and it's not It's it's it's just not you're not just not going to be able to live in it and I think that's no thing No, yeah. Yeah, that's that's exactly Um and again coming from my hyper secular iron box it was the precisely the reason I left it was like oh Life is too much to fit in here like it's a great tool Yeah, throw away the tool, but also don't pretend the tool is all there Right there is that's a very silly thing to do and it's not even concurrent with even the philosophy of science itself you know You're supposed to be looking at the information that doesn't fit. That's what makes it grow That's right Um Where are we at? Oh, wow, we've done it again nick. Um, I really meant to get to the The rest of it. Um Well, what can what should we do in this let in this next five minutes I could try and run through some of cult four. Okay, give us a take we'll talk again Yeah, it might be useful to To talk again. I can try and connect some of it at least maybe like go through my Why I entered um so so yes after I Fallen back down in a sense when I realized I could not keep this state stable um Which again even saying I could not keep the state stable you can hear the error there already but um Like if you know, it wasn't my job to keep the state stable but You know I had burnt off 99 percent of my Personality granted i'd received so much information and all this other stuff, but I hadn't I didn't know what to do with it. So The way everything leaned I figured well, let me go see what this is You know, let me go investigate what is happening here and take what I can from it and and see what happens And uh, and it was an interesting cult So like a lot of the classic ideas people have around cults, right? No descent is allowed and we've got our hyper uh specific Thing and you have to cut off all your relationships to everyone, you know in order to you know, become properly indoctrinated None of that existed here Most of it was built off of arguing and fighting Right descent was highly encouraged and um I often like to use the metaphor of a internal combustion engine as opposed to a steam engine Right the steam engine. It's it's the way it functions is by releasing That which gets too hot, you know Out into the the outside world and I think a lot of systems kind of function like that, you know, they it's building energy within its cultic framework by kicking out the uh exhaust Whereas we see a far more efficient system arise with the internal combustion engine, which is using those bright sparks those in a sense descent itself to actually fuel the functioning of the system You know, that's what's producing the energy that we're using to then, you know propellers or whatever We're using the motor for And you can keep going with that metaphor I think it would be interesting to try and metaphorize uh nuclear fusion as uh You know An example of a hyper efficient system But i'm getting off off the mark here, um We got a couple minutes, um So yeah Again, it's hard for me to organize all of this just because it was such a bizarre experience the place that it was it was acting in was um, A subculture of facebook called weird facebook Which probably a lot of people don't even know it exists, but it's a pretty large network of people that are In a sense the counterculture and most the memes and everything that you see a lot of actually the value of the um System itself was coming from this weird little subculture And the cult leader, you know in a sense viewed this as the the prostitutes and the the uh, the the tax men of the The modern, you know, it's yeah in the streets in a sense. You're not going to the pharisees. You're going Yep. Yep And so you know a lot of it was like Trolling people using trolling as a well a psycho spiritual technology as vervecky might might put it and uh These are going to take too long to properly explain so And i'm not well organized right now so that might be I know we pushed it twice now but uh It might be a good spot for for a final discussion, okay Well, I but I thought I thought I thought our conversation on the ineffable Was was helpful. I I I enjoyed it at least yeah very much and I think others might You know the difference Why is it so hard to talk about the ineffable? Yeah, by definition of the word It's just the way the things you can't talk about. Well, why can't I talk about them? Exactly that this is like the things you can't see. Well, why can't I see it? Once you say oh, yeah, I didn't want to see that. Yeah, okay now you can't There you go Oh, we human beings are something else but anyway, nick, so so sign up for another slot and um and uh, we'll uh, we'll finally finally finish We'll get to it. It's okay and somewhat someone once told me he says you should go like you should go like uh, You should go like joe rogan. You should just have you know, go three four hours I certainly could but that's that's not the way i'm I'm i'm able to structure this joe rogan invites his guest and I receive my guests, but I I actually very different It is it's very different, but I think i've actually been quite blessed by receiving my conversation partners yeah The the variety the hidden gems if you will that's exactly right because the variety is just outstanding and if I were directing If I were directing the conversations I couldn't do this because and this gets into the same dynamic because i'm too limited Yeah, and you know we we in our culture the fad is that we talk about people as infinite No, we're not infinite at all. We're we're pretty pretty repetitive and sometimes quite Predictable so it's when they get more of us that things get more interesting. So yes. Yes Definitely. Oh and right. That's that same thing. We might be able to channel something that is infinite But we certainly don't get to say we're the thing that's infinite. Exactly Exactly No, that's that's right. How small we are Yeah, anyway, it's great talk to you again nick So sign up for another slot and we'll do this again. Awesome. Sounds good paul. Great talking to you. Take care