https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=e5wNUOUfPhg

 Are we live, Rick? We are live. Okay. This is our Friday morning California time question and answer live stream. Now I take the questions from the Bridges of Meaning Discord server. There's a special room that says PVK Q&A recorded and there's questions for PVK. There's a whole section in the Bridges of Meaning Discord server where we do this and don't have a lot of questions this week, which is kind of fun. So maybe we'll have more conversation in the voice chat room, which is part of the goal of this. And once I have a computer over here where I kind of try to keep an eye on the live stream and Rick always keeps his eye on the live stream. So I'm just setting that up because Rick and I are late because Rick and I always are chatting and not starting on time. So anybody have a burning question they wanted to ask before I dive into the questions that have already been posted? Hearing none, I will proceed. Question from April 19. In light of your recent conversation with John Vervecky and JP Marceau, which went into the areas of Platinus, Zen, and the Kyoto school, and your deep reading and study of the progression of Christianity, particularly in the book, Reformations, if we accept that Christ is the best and truest way to attain divination or union with the Logos Dharma, how can we know which manifestation of the Christian faith is more accurate? How can we know whether or not John Calvin or Jonathan Pigeot, two French speaking reformers? Where's the meme guys? You got a meme connect Jonathan Pigeot and John Calvin. That would be tremendously fun. Has it right or does it play a role? I like CS Lewis's framework of mere Christianity, where mere Christianity is sort of a hallway, but it's rooms off that hallway where there are fires and pipes and pints and conversations and liturgies and music and libraries and all those things. So if you can't help but come to it and ask which one is truest or most right, and that's absolutely good. And I have zero problem with within reason, it's kind of an ironic word choice, within reason the two people debate. Jonathan is connecting me up with a Orthodox priest who used to be Christian reformed. Hopefully we'll do a conversation and that'll be fun. Because I'd like to hear a story, I'd like to hear why he left the Christian Reformed Church and went to become an Orthodox priest. I think that's a cool story. Now I have no plans on leaving the Christian Reformed Church. And the Christian Reformed Church is a room off that hallway where there's Oli Bolan and strove waffles and little churches like Northside Chapel where there was soul food and Indonesian food and black folks and white folks and all kinds of people. And so my admonition would be you might first enter the hallway and you might find yourself trying out some of the rooms and all of the questions about which room is more true or less true. That's certainly a valid thing to pursue, but also a question of fittedness and a question of calling. God does not always call because when God calls you to a room, consumerists first imagine that the room ought to suit me. And that's sort of how church shoppers, even the language is consumeristic, where instead they should probably also think of what room is God calling me to? What room does God want me to serve? And so when people are looking around for a church, I often suggest that they should not just look for a church that meets their needs, but they should look for a church that needs them. Because, you know, every Sunday here at Living Stones, you know, right now during COVID we have just, you know, between 10 and 20 saints that are gathered here and we sing songs. And the beautiful thing about a small church and a small tradition is that you get to participate in a big church unless you're just a top. Someone's got a mic out there. LF Bazani, you know, thanks. Okay. If you go to a mega church, what are you going to do? Well, you're going to help cars park. And that's a wonderful servant thing to do. You might hand out bulletins. You might volunteer for this, for that. You're not going to get a chance to pick songs or lead music or use your musical talents unless you have just totally top shelf musical talents. And in a small church you will. You can have a big impact in people's lives. God can use you greatly in a small church. So I would say obviously you want to wrestle with the tradition to find one that fits you and find one that you think is most right, but find a church where God is calling you to use your gifts and serve. So that would be my answer to that. All of House. Hi Paul. Sorry for the long questions, but I'm not sure whether you know these things. So I'd rather give you the context. I heard you mention how the Council of Trent introduced the Catholic Church to modernity. That's at least Carlos Erie's thesis. And he's probably right. As someone that regularly attends the Tridentine Mass, the traditional Latin Mass, this is called my attention. As you know, there was an intense fighting going on in the church. The Tridentine Mass is in this fight a symbol of traditionalists, which is quite ironic. While the Second Vatican Council is the blank card that progressives liberals use to push everything, even if it has nothing to do with the council itself. The trads also rally behind the figures like Pius X, who condemned heresy of modernism. And to a degree, to a small degree, also Pius V, Saint Pius V, the pope during the council. Just for information, the heresy of modernism is defined as the belief that the teachings of the church must be actualized with the times. Could you expand on more on the Council of Trent? Now that modernity is going away, should we also move away from the Council of Trent instead of trying to hold on to it? Should Catholics learn more about this part of their history? Yes. Where can I start? Well, I'm by no means an expert in the Council of Trent. So you go through school and you get an education, and this sort of connects back to the first question. I was educated in a tradition that was rather anti-Catholic, and so history was told with a particular slant. And so the Council of Trent, my education in the Council of Trent, at least in my denomination, was mostly formed by the Council of Trent pushed back on certain Reformed teachings. And even in Carlos Erie's book, Reformations, it's quite obvious that many of the Protestant reformation mobilized the Catholic Church to push back against it, but quite frankly in a lot of good ways. And ironically, as this is not unusual over history, that even the ways that the Council of Trent pushed back against the Protestant reformation, they were in fact in some ways succumbing to it. So what the Council of Trent sort of did was systematize and stabilize the needed reforms of the Roman Catholic Church to not continue to lose ground to the Protestant reformation. Now what Carlos Erie notes in his book is that this led to a lot of standardization. Now in the 16th, 17th century, nobody knew what modernity was. It was there, it was too close, they couldn't label it. And so there were a lot of miracle stories, there were a lot of saints. One of the things that happened in the Council of Trent was that they established a rather rigorous, centralized, fact-based, now when you listen to these words, they sound very modern, rigorous, centralized, evidence-based standard for miracles, so that when there were miracles within the Church, the Church would study them in a rather scientific way. Why did they do that? Because they were countering the charge of the Protestants that the Roman Catholic Church was superstitious. Now there's been some criticism of Carlos Erie's book on really not so much his take on the Catholics, but his take on the Protestants. The complaints are that he reads too much secularist, anti-miracle modernity into his telling of the Protestant story, and I tend to agree with those critics of the book. But the Roman Catholics did double down on miracles, but they understood that in order for their miracles to be acceptable to the increasing, the increasing tastes of the age, they needed to sort of crack down on charlatanism and a lot of these things. Another example is the process of canonization for a saint. Suddenly in, suddenly, I've got to turn my watch on, do not disturb, because otherwise I do get disturbed. Suddenly after the Council of Trent, in order to become a saint, you had to pass through a much slower process, which ironically as Carlos Erie notes, made it more difficult for sort of small obscure saints to become accepted and canonized in the Church. Often you needed a wealthy, wealthy backers, religious order, something of this nature in order to actually, you needed to be a higher status person to be canonized as a saint after Trent. There were a lot of little shrines and a lot of stuff that sort of looked probably dumpy campy homey, a lot of stuff looked folk religion-ish, and the Council of Trent in a very centralized way, centralization, another aspect of modernity, you know, this monarchical vision where we're going to get at the facts and they're going to be objective. So the Council of Trent manifests all these things, but in doing so, they're not thinking about modernity, they're just trying to address the needs of the age. Now in a major effort like this, especially in a major institution like this, you're going to sort of lock in these things, and that's exactly the goal. And so, you know, at least Carlos Iri's take on the anti, you know, the response to the Protestant Reformation is that in many, many ways the Roman Catholic Church cleaned up their act, and ironically, they saw a proliferation of miracles and miracle stories. A lot of the monastic orders had gotten quite corrupt, and ironically, in the move to purify and reform these corrupt monastic orders, they, you know, new monastic orders proliferated, even more rigorous, and so what you see in this process is on one hand very much a reform process that strengthened the Catholic Church, that purified the Catholic Church, but in doing so, it made the Catholic Church more modern, and these kinds of transitions always have this dynamic. Now it makes a lot of sense, now I'm treading on grounds that I know very little about, but I'm listening to friends like Brett Sockold, Cale Zeldin, Mary Cohen, I mean, a lot of the, Hank, I'm not listening to you yet, you haven't been a Catholic too long, and Hank knows who I'm talking to, and so does Sam, and you can see Hank and Sam on Sam's channel, but what I see in the conversation around Vatican too is, well, some of these questions are rising, and to listen to Bishop Barron talk to Jordan Peterson about the way that religious classes were regarded in his Roman Catholic school, not as serious as math or history, more like P.E., and that's coming from Bishop Barron, who loved to play baseball. You can see that the people who are making the reforms at the moment don't have enough perspective to understand, like we would a number of centuries later, how those reforms are of the age, and contribute actually to, in many ways, I mean, what you could do is look at the Protestant Reformation and the Counter Reformation in the Roman Catholic Church and say, both of these are fruits of modernity, but they go in two different directions, and actually the church and church history are richer for it, even though at the time it was a terrible bloody mess. So, Vatican too is in some ways, you know, post-modernity, already getting into the church, and you know, you heard Bishop Barron and Jamie Smith, and in the CRC tradition, you know, 10, 15, 20 years ago already sort of said, you know, there's definitely some issues with post-modernity, but there's some blessings with it too. And one of the things that I pointed out in my channel, much to the horror of someone like Carl who came in for some of the conversations, is that not only are all Catholics and Orthodox today a little bit Protestant, well, a lot of people who are really pushing against post-modernity are a little bit post-modern. That's the way these ages work, and in a way, it's sort of like a vaccine, you probably can't fight against post-modernity unless at least to some degree or another, you've got some post-modernity in your system. And the Council of Trent couldn't fight against modernity unless it had some modernity in its system. And so in the Council of Trent, you're using, you're developing modernist tools in order to address modernity. And now we look back hundreds of years later and say, wow, that sure was a modernization of the church, and you know, rightfully so. Even the standardization of the mass into Latin was a very modern move, and someone might say, well, at the beginning of the period of the Reformation and the printing press, you're going to have this explosion of diversity, of languages. You're going to have, you know, and just even look at what happened to the German language. The German language was quite diverse and still is, I'm told, and some of you would know that far better than I am. You know, the German of the Swiss is a little different from the German of other places in Germany. Luther in some ways by his Bible standardizes German. The King James version of the Bible in some ways standardizes English. All of this stuff is going on, and especially with traditions like Christianity, they might be a little bit more modern, but they are also fulfilling it and attempting to redeem it. So all of these things are happening, and so now with Vatican II, I suspect you've got a similar dynamic going. And so the kinds of wars between the trads and the Vatican II Catholics, I mean, the Vatican II Catholicism, the Vatican II Catholicism, the Vatican II Catholicism, the Vatican Catholicism, the Vatican II Catholicism, the Vatican II Catholicism, the Vatican II Catholicism, the Vatican II Catholicism are going to be waged. And so, you know, you've got a guy like Bishop Barron, he's a bishop. What does that mean? It means he's a company man. What does that mean? It means he's going to defend a church council been dutifully passed. Now I'm about to expose a part of my Protestantism and maybe that's a little bit of cynicism. You can make all of the loud noises you want about councils and things of that nature but anybody reading through Roman Catholic history or Protestant history or church history will have episodes that they say, this was a really strong thing in the church, and other episodes that they say, I'm not sure about this decision. But now if you're a company man like a bishop you probably sort of say, well I'm not sure we necessarily made all the right moves but by the will of God it was part of his plan and God will bring good out of it. And so that's what company men do and women. And so in the Christian Reformed Church I'm an ordained minister so in some ways I'm a company man. And as Brett Sockel often makes the point, he's not a bishop, he's a theologian, so he's not, you know, again in the Christian Reformed Church you have ministers of the word, elders and deacons, they're all ordained. I don't know exactly how it works in the Roman Catholic Church but it doesn't appear to me that Brett Sockel is ordained. But when he talks about the kinds of decisions his bishop has to make and the kind of care his bishop has to use in speaking, his bishop is speaking in some ways for the whole church and the tradition so a good bishop has to be careful. So that's sort of the way these things flow out. So yeah it's an irony asking a Catholic asking a Calvinist about Trent but we do live in strange times. So there's my answer. I don't know, I know we've got a good number of Roman Catholics on the discord. Anyone want to follow up on this at all? And they're all quiet. All right I'll continue on. Paul? Yes? Go ahead. I just have one comment about, because these two questions that you just answered kind of tie into one another a little bit. I just wanted to say that when you were talking about the hallway and because I'm in the hallway right now totally and when you're talking about the hallway and you know choosing you know thinking that you're the one making the choice of the church but in reality it might be God you know pushing you towards a certain church whether you like it or not. That seems to me to be a really insightful point because it's not like I feel like a vast majority of Christians believe that there are people in the Orthodox Church or the Catholic Church or the Protestant Church, a church that they're not a part of that are saved and if you really believe that you kind of have to wonder it's like well if God's sovereign and God has a plan if there's people in these churches that are saved well then perhaps these churches do serve a purpose of saving people even though you disagree with them. So I just thought that was a good point. God uses lots of stuff that, God uses lots of stuff. He used a cross. It's right there at the center of the face. He used a Roman instrument of political torture to save the world. That's what God does. So all right I'll get to Colton's question. Hello Paul I seem to be Mr. Soteriology on this server. That's doctrine of salvation for those of you who don't speak kind of Yankee Latin. I apologize for that. No need to apologize. Nevertheless I'm obsessed with it. Well there you have it. I've been drifting farther into the sphere of Reformed theology. Oh my with some reservations. I don't want to discuss the free will controversy in the context of Reformed theology. I'd rather like advice from one Reformed person to another. What is the reform take on something like Peterson's self-authoring program? Reformed people tend to believe fundamental changes will occur through the work of the Holy Spirit, not of our own accord. Is this perhaps only in regard to saved people? Does the Holy Spirit work in unsaved people who wish to better themselves? You probably heard me say this a few times. I'll probably keep saying it. The God of creation is the God of salvation. The God of creation is the God of redemption. When we say the Holy Spirit moved that does not exclude all levels of materiality contributing to a final effect. That is deeply Reformed. What has emerged in Christianity for some good reasons and it's not a totally negative thing is what I call this sort of Cartesian spiritual substance dualism. I've told this story before. I'm sitting around a room. Someone tells a little story of some extraordinary events that are happening and they say that's a God thing. What they mean by that is certain seemingly unnatural occurrences and causes have contributed to some outcome that seems very much in alignment with the kingdom. That's a wonderful thing. Miracles are for that. Not everything God does will be within our framework of the natural. But God seems to do the majority of his work with the natural because nature is not his enemy. We are not Gnostics. Nature is our sister. Natural causes are manifestations of God in a way. Not wholly and completely. This is one of the most difficult things that I think we today have to get our minds around. When you read the Bible there is a level of karmic causation. I'm only using that word because it's so popular in the culture. I'm not trying to carry in Hindu ideas of karma. But if something happens it must be God's will. That comes through in Calvinism too. The Bible talks like that for a very good reason. It's very God number one-ish. But then the book of Job comes in and pushes back on that. This is where narrative affords nuance that is often difficult to accomplish in other forms of written communication. That okay when things happen they're the will of God but that doesn't mean that everything that happens is good and it doesn't mean that God is authoring evil. If we can embrace the verse that says while we were sinners Christ died for us then it's quite clear that God was moving on our behalf even before we crossed over some line of quickening as we might say in terms of Christian conversion. I think that the Pauline divine election passages bear witness to this. I think most Orthodox Christians don't believe in the pre-existence of inhuman pre-existence before... this is such hard stuff when you really get into the weeds. But so before the foundations of the earth God loved us and called us. That's what that language points to. That God was setting up my story when great-great-grandpa Hartog sent his son Saka. Now Saka I've just sort of figured out is probably a Dutch version of Ezekiel because it was like Ezekiel Hartog Hymen that's how the Jews had him. You know you just find these names just repeated again and again and again through the generations. They just kept recycling the names. So Hartog sent Saka to... gosh I hope to one day be reunited with my dead relatives and to ask them these questions and boy that's gonna be a lot of fun to meet my great-great-grandfather who sent my great-grandfather through Ellis Island to West Michigan and then pulled some of those Dutchmen over and I really want to ask why was it what were you fleeing from in Friesland? Why were you running away from the Netherlands and you know you got kicked out of the Jewish community? What did you do to deserve that? So you know but me right now sitting in Sacramento California is the some product of just within my lifetime there's good things and bad things that have led to this moment to me being on this Discord server to me being on YouTube to me talking to all of you about Jordan Peterson and all these you know randos that I talked to. What happened in Hartog to Hartog and with and by Hartog in the Netherlands you know over a hundred years ago brought us to this point. Was that God? Yes. Was that the Holy Spirit? Yes. You know we get these ideas they're so gnostic that somehow there needs to be this unnatural thing as if God isn't the author of creation as if God isn't the author of history. So no and what I'm saying I believe is deeply reformed and in fact when I talk about divine election people get all nervous like well I didn't have any choice in it. No you don't understand you don't even understand what has gone into the choice so you go to the car dealer and you decide you're gonna buy a Mazda or a Toyota. I have free choice. Yeah but you know what, it's all built on the decisions of the Mazda Corporation and the Toyota Corporation and your ancestors decisions and some you know romantic dinner that your great grandparents had that led to your grandfather or your grandmother and and and and and and and and and and we sit in the middle of history and say I choose my destiny. I look at that and say that's a load of crap. The vast majority of your life you didn't choose. That doesn't mean you don't have agency. That doesn't mean your choices aren't consequential. That doesn't mean your choices aren't real. But let's give Sam Harris's due. Our choices aren't quite as free as we imagine they are. But to push back against Sam Harris, no. But they are really legitimate and we hold each other accountable to them. And in fact, we participate in the unfolding of history just like my great great grandfather sent my great grandfather to America and participated in me being here right now. And so now what does this have to do with my salvation? Now suddenly again we get very gnostic and we say well that's salvation. That's a special world about word about going to heaven when you die. Okay, yeah that's true. But that's not all that word is because part of my salvation is finding Jordan Peterson and having to wrap my head around this whole phenomenon that happened after him. And part of my salvation is finding Tim Keller or being born to Stan and Barb or being raised in Patterson and going to the Dominican Republic and and and and and and and and and all that contributes to my salvation. Even my sin, even my sin contributes to my salvation. Sometimes in some painful ways but it's there. So our God is big and he's the author of history. And that salvation is happening through history, through chemistry, through psychology, through engineering. You know I, my son works at the water treatment plant in Sacramento and we were joking about you know essential workers and I said you know yeah you should get that vaccine soon because you know water treatment is a pretty essential thing. You know have the whole city of Sacramento unable to flush toilets for a couple of days. We'll see how essential water treatment is or just flush all that raw sewage into the Sacramento River flowing on down to Stockton. We'll see how they feel about or flowing into the delta. We'll see how essential they feel water treatment is and on and on and on and on and on and on and on. So God is great and he's big and the God of salvation is the God of creation and he sets up our salvation even in creation. And yeah so I think my view is that all of this is a reformed worldview and maybe just like with theosis some Roman Catholics will say hey wait a minute no that's Catholic theology and the Orthodox will say well you didn't use quite the right words but that's sort of what we mean. So there's our mere Christianity and our hallway and I get off into this little room with Dutch Calvinists because my crazy Jewish ancestors stopped being Jewish. So here I am. I don't know what to say. I think that's the way I see it and that's why I see all this talk about miracles and it's like me being here is kind of a miracle. Yeah but it's not supernatural. Well this natural supernatural thing I'm not sure it's all that it's cracked up to be. It has its meaning, it has its place, it has its sense but it's not the most helpful line in the world. I don't know if that answers your question. So yeah I think that me trying to tell you that like to stay away from the free will controversy I guess is kind of impossible with the nature of the question so I'm sorry about that. That's okay. You kind of did get into it a little bit but you were more on track I thought in the beginning with the nature of the original question because I was asking about right I mean the Calvinist believes that you know regardless of whether or not there's a lot of nuance which is what you just basically described it's not like Gnosticism which I agree with that but the Calvinist believes that God is at the center of like a fundamental change of our will from you know dead sinner to you know you know having the ability to submit to God's will. I mean before we didn't at all and then God works in us and then we do and so what I was kind of asking about is like well what if someone wants to make themselves better? What if someone wants to change their will right because you know if you are lazy and can never get out of bed and do your homework or whatever and you want to self-author your way into a college degree or out of your college degree into a job can you actually do that or does God help you do that despite your lack of belief in him and maybe conscious belief isn't required in that instance? Do you see what I'm getting at there? It's sort of more of a will question especially in regards to the unbeliever about changing particular habits about yourself. A big part of the drama around what is today often assumed to be Calvinism is a lot of 17th and 18th century implicit ideas about psychology and human anthropology. I do not believe that I just had a conversation with a friend yesterday who read a book recently that the book tried to sort of in a tried to sort of equate affections with emotions. Now if you've ever read any Jonathan Edwards or any John Piper trying to in some ways bring Jonathan Edwards into the 20th century religious affections was a very important term for the protestants and for the puritans. When we say the word affections now we don't mean what they meant and so in this particular book that my friend was talking about affections and emotions were sort of slammed together and said this is the same thing. Any reader with any nuance at all who looks at the puritans would have to say they're by no means the same thing. One of the reasons I really like Brett Sockhold's book about transubstantiation is that in the book he was able to demonstrate that Luther with consubstantiation was sort of trying to get at what acquiescence was at what what what Aquinas was trying to get at with his transubstantiation term but the philosophical language underneath the argument had shifted to the degree that Luther just kept you know Luther was hardly one to not express his emotions. Luther Luther was just you know according to Brett Sockhold Luther was just simply misreading Aquinas and he was in some ways he and Calvin were trying to recapture something of Aquinas but they couldn't see it because of how Aquinas was being read and understood in the 16th century and how Aristotle was being read and understood in the 16th century. So we've got all of these all of this stuff underneath these debates about and you know I continue to see it regularly in the comment section and I always laugh every time I see it you know you know some some somebody is horrified that I'm a Calvinist and they would never listen to a Calvinist because Calvinists mean determinism and whenever I hear that I think have you ever read a biography of John Calvin have you ever read John Calvin why would someone who's a imagine a thorough growing determinist write a book Calvin's Institutes is sort of this massive popular devotional book that penetrated and sort of reformulated a certain level of the Protestant Reformation in the second wave why would you even bother writing anything if you're actually a determinist and so I hear all these stories and Calvinists who think they themselves are determinists are out there admonishing with all they have and trying with all their heart to reformulate their wills and you look at the Puritans the Puritans made you know had an intensive study of the human will and how to reformulate it with respect to God in some ways Jordan Peterson's self-authoring program fits right into that Puritan project yet Puritans get labeled as determinists and I look at this and I think what kind of determinist has a self-authoring program but in 18th century Puritan language which is what they were doing you know again just a little bit that I read from Jonathan Edwards or from George Marsden's biography of Jonathan Edwards of Timothy Edwards Jonathan's father you know looking at his son's awakening his son's wokeness and wow that was sort of a passing wokeness we're gonna have to wait for one of his awokenings to appear in his life that will finally catch and it does and and the Puritans were constantly watching themselves with respect to the will and they had a large subtle complex theology of the will and all of this stuff all of that just stuff just kind of gets all washed off and we say Calvinists are determinists and I think I've never met one so oh Vanderklae you're a Calvinist so you must be a determinist really okay if you know I can't stop you from painting me with that brush if you want to and it doesn't really bother me because if you call me a determinist and I don't act like one and then and then then then the comments come well well Paul says he's a Calvinist but he's not really one so I just find the whole label game hilarious so I think you know I love this probably apocryphal story about Augustine where I picked up the story from Tim Keller where someone runs to Augustine and and falls down and says oh Augustine I'm afraid I'm I'm afraid I'm reprobate I'm afraid I'm damned from the foundations of the world to hell I'm afraid I'm not elect and Augustine says well then get to a church and get elect you know it's probably an apocryphal story I don't know if it's real or not but I love it because that's what I've seen all my life so all of this and and did Puritans wonder about their election absolutely did they sort of paint themselves in that box absolutely did it for some of them a la the Weber thesis result in extraordinary efforts willful efforts towards demonstrating and proving that they were part of the elect probably amen so be it that's fine you know we get into our heads in all kinds of crazy ways that's just what people do we we have all kinds of stupid people tricks so um you know I I see people tripping over themselves with this stuff and I just think well I guess if you want to play that game you can me I got enough problem you know trying to discipline this broken sinful nature and in a lot of ways I can use all the help I can get from you know and I even look at something like you know 12-step program where what do you say right at the beginning of a 12 step program that basically alcoholism is is a disease okay we're going to use that therapeutic formulation fine and but then we sort of divinize it and it's or or agentifies it and and it's it's taken over my life so I need a I need a higher power someone stronger than myself to deliver me from the evils of alcohol and so well what do I do well just follow the 12 steps you're doing a moral inventory you're turning your life over to this higher power you're doing all of that stuff all that stuff is willful behavior but it's all scaffolded by a sponsor and a support group and a vision of what your life could be like if you're sober so something you're running towards and recognizing all of the crap that you've done in the past as a result of your alcoholism and you're running away from that you know Peterson did all this work in in alcoholism studies and when you look at the self-authoring program it's like there's a lot of 12-step stuff in there isn't there and you know just yesterday on the on the server in a in a conversation I was talking to a couple of guys who've been through 12-step programs and you know so when they heard Peterson talk it's like oh he's singing my song because Peterson had done that now where's the will in that well you know what you're going to have to exercise will to get up out of your bed and get to a meeting when you need to go to a meeting you're going to have to exercise your will to call your sponsor when you need to talk to your sponsor you're going to have to exercise your will to maybe you're going to shop in a different store alcoholics you know recovering alcoholics have all sorts of little tricks that they develop to stay sober and I've seen that with all kinds of people trying to rein in all all sorts of bad habits that they've that they've had difficulty with and I say yeah use those tricks absolutely nothing wrong with deciding you're going to shop at this store and not this store because that particular alcohol aisle holds a certain you know gravity to you now where's your will in that well it's all scaffolded around I've just turned my life over to a higher power that's going to deliver me from this scourge of alcoholism so all of this language has meaning and it has utility and it can be worked in systems to our benefit but what I see sometimes in these intramural scuffles about Armenian versus Calvinists yada yada yada is okay we're working through these items and these issues but how do the outcomes look well I find I find Calvinists you know brow beating their Calvinist preachers brow beating their audiences just as bad as an Armenian would so I hold all that stuff a little bit lightly and people want to try and work it out with molinism and all these things and I go for it you know if you can work up something that really helps you I don't you're not gonna have an enemy in me but yeah that's that's how I see it maybe I'm a pragmatist in that sense but yeah if if Jordan Peterson's you know I saw the awakening from the meeting crisis guys you know talk to talk to Manuel you know good old iron root who spent gosh forever in the bowels of the bridges of meaning voice chat rooms he was there 24-7 and you know hanging out with all these Christians and we didn't help him much and he goes over to the Christians and we didn't help him much and he goes over to the verveky channel and he starts meditating and he starts meditating and you know finding some structure in his life and going to bed on time and getting up on time and you know things of his life start falling together you know I might be offended that you know he didn't have this he wasn't able to take this step at the bridges of meaning discord server why did he have to go over to the enemy verveky camp I'm not gonna play those games you know he tells me he's doing better amen I you know they might say well Paul is soft on new way on verveky new ageism or whatever way you want to slap me with slap away bucko here's the thing I believe that all the way back to the previous question I do believe that Christianity is the best way not only of finding union with Christ reconciliation with God but I believe Christianity is the way that this entire physical world finds reconciliation with God now Luke might say oh Paul sound like a universalist again well there you go that's the gospel and there's lots of little details in there but if someone leaves Christianity and gets a little cleaned up and then comes back in and is able to achieve new heights in their Christianity I'd say God can pretty much write our lives as he wants look at look at the look at I hope I get his right name right John Newton the author of amazing grace his biography is out there in public domain read it you know he became a Calvinist minister and he was a slave owner he was the the just just read what he writes about himself he was a bad man and and perhaps even in his older days he didn't sufficiently in some some in some moments appreciate the completeness of God's forgiveness for his sins but that tortured soul winds up writing a hymn amazing grace which has blessed millions and even people who are outside the church hear that song and say boy there's something about that song and that came about because John Newton at one point in his life was a horrible human being that's what God does God is the best storyteller truth is stranger than fiction and he writes the greatest redemption stories and that's why movies have to keep trying to rip off Jesus and put Jesus in different people and that's why Jordan Peterson looks at the hero archetype and looks at Christ and says this is an archetypal story I don't think we can get around it and this is why I think Christianity is the best story this is why I remain a Christian so someone sneaks on off to the verveky side of things and comes back with his life a little bit more in order or someone sneaks off to do the self-authoring program and comes back and and finds you know some riches in Christianity that he didn't expect even probably next week I'll release my my the video of um you know my conversation with Rafe and then after that my conversation with Rafe and John you know Rafe I'm sort of a non-theistic Christian all right I'll take that let's keep talking because I suspect that if you can embrace belief in God at least act like he's a person or three and begin to lean into that relationship you'll find new joys sometimes new sorrows but you'll find new joys and new levels of the renovation of heaven and earth that's why I'm a Christian because I believe this stuff and I've just seen an experience that I don't know God can take someone who's vehemently murdering Jews who were born in the Roman Empire who are calling themselves Christians and hunting them down that's who Saul of Tarsus was targeting he can stop them on the road of Damascus and he can tell Ananias you go pray for you go pray for Saul and Ananias says I don't want to get anywhere near that man and the Lord says I'll show him how much he needs to suffer you just do what I say get your will in line with me so yeah there's my answer Paul if I may you don't have to respond to this but I'd just like to make a comment if that's okay sure um I know there's a lot of people on the server who probably know I discuss this stuff a lot and um and might think that it's silly because I'm basically just you know I'm trying to play God or figure out God's mind or whatever and that's a totally legitimate you know accusation and curiosity it's like why is this guy so obsessed with this question but I just wanted to tell us a quick story to illustrate why I think it like it's or at least why it's an important deal to me you know I was talking to my mother uh yesterday the day before about my father who has some issues with basically getting his life in order you know at one point in time I was preaching to my father about Jordan B Peterson before I was a Christian and now obviously I'm preaching to my father about God constantly you know um because you know it's what else am I going to do right and then I was sitting there wondering and I was wondering I was kind of as I was talking to my mom and giving her answers I was thinking you know I started like my speeches started breaking up because I was like well can he change his will can he actually do anything without being saved is he just stuck in his own you know inequity and so I was just sort of just fumbling over my own you know my own interpretation of Reformed theology if that makes sense and so it's very important for me that I understand how this stuff works because I don't want to be the guy who gives somebody advice or you know gives my own father advice and say you know oh well if you're not a Calvinist you know if you don't believe in God if you don't believe in God you're never going to get anywhere you just can't do anything without God you're just going to be stuck in your pit you know and I mean that would be awful right and I just I want to I want to have a good answer and a good understanding of this issue to be able to reconcile with my own mind and with other people's minds what it means to you know change your behavior and change your will and change how you act and if if that does require God or whatever and so I just I just wanted to say that because I wanted to explain my own quandaries over this these issues it's not just I want to play God you know I want to submit to God's will in the right way not in a legalistic legalistic way not in an open theism way just in the in the right way so you want good things for your father that's a good thing Jordan Peterson talk you want to save your father you want to rescue your father from the underworld and my advice would be pray live out what you want your father to become love your father figure out how to love him the best you can and it's absolutely nothing wrong with working hard on these questions because almost all the worthwhile answers we have in the world are because someone had usually a personal situation in their life that they really care about really care about that forced them to work on really hard things and that effort was not in vain and new life came and whether that might not come in the ways that you imagine you want or it should but part of the promise of Christ is that we labor not in vain so don't don't you don't need to apologize for for this being your obsession right now we all we all have our obsessions at one time or another and I think they come from God and they think they will come for your benefit and for the benefit of the church in the world so keep praying and keep loving and keep thinking and keep trying so it's a good thing all right Chad could we get a higher resolution look at your daily prayer life or spiritual practices also thanks for the this estuary I don't really hold myself up as a an example to anyone as a spiritual athlete my prayer life is quite simple it's I pray in the morning when I wake up and I pray at night when I go to bed I read scripture during the day sometimes sometimes in a more organized way sometimes in a less organized way I pray throughout the day in impromptu ways or as part of my vocation if I pray with someone like I said I don't hold myself out there as some great spiritual athlete there are people out there who have far better developed devotional lives than I do but you asked me to do this that's truth that's how it is for me I find some clergy find it find their vocation difficult in terms of their experience of their piety and relationship with God I've never had that experience I've always found it congenial and so yeah I find I find sermon preparation and Bible study preparation and small group ministry to all be enriching and life-giving in terms of my personal faith and I find these conversations the same way I find the work that I do my video making feeds my spiritual life and there's plenty of other adversity that comes into my life so it isn't just an echo chamber but that's but there are many there are many many many good tools out there there's the daily office I was thinking about having my friend Phil Reinders on the channel my friend Phil Reinders wrote one of the most one of the most helpful little books by CRC publication hey Rick could you come in here and maybe open the door for Daniel and talk to him a little bit Hey Rick could you come in here and maybe open the door for Daniel and talk to him a little bit which was basically the Heideberg catechism some set prayers so there's tons of stuff out there and I would say look around and find just let him know that I'm a little busy right now just look around and find something that really works for you is he running away okay okay so yeah that'd be my that'd be my recommendation sorry for the disruption it's just you know I've actually got Rick here so someone can actually answer the door for me so that's kind of nice all right as long as the uh well I have to have Anselman Rick wants to give Anselman administrator privileges in the comment section so thanks Rick okay how can I be sure how can I be sure that my acts of worship are not just so I can be more productive happier etc in other words how do you know that you're not sort of your your acts of worship are truly sacrificial some of them will be some of them only not everything has to be sacrificial you know you should it's not a bad thing to go to church because you want to it's not a bad thing to go to a church that you love I mean God isn't looking for our misery sometimes he brings us misery so we can go into deeper pleasures but God gives good gifts for us to enjoy when we sit down and the food is good we should praise God and thank God for it when the food is you know so Heidelberg catechism Lord's Day 10 on providence we praise him for when we praise him and we're grateful when things go well and because we know things come from his fatherly hand we're encouraged when things don't go well so don't feel guilty about enjoying your acts of worship God is good he loves to give good gifts to his children I try hard to make sure that I'm not praying to God of convenience or productivity but it is hard to know I'm really aiming right well here's the good news and the bad news trouble will find you in this world Jesus says in this world you will have trouble so if you are in a season where your obedience is a blessed thing praise God because seasons will come when your obedience will be difficult and when you will be tried and in the Lord's Prayer we're told we're giving full license to ask for deliverance from the times of trying so pray that prayer but in my experience they will come some of them some people seem to get them all the time other people don't get them very much okay so but don't feel guilty because but but at the same time I mean your your question and your concern is warranted and so you should check yourself and and figure out what's right the last thing I want is end of the night prayer to be thank you God for the great day I had oh that should be a great should be a wonderful prayer to pray and I pray that you can pray that prayer many many times that God give you many great days hard things will come they always do and when they do if you cling to God he can turn them to your good turn them to his glory and turn them to your refinement so don't feel bad when times are good just thank God for him but yeah be careful that you're not just chasing the God of your own convenience and that's where the Christian community comes in that's where obedience to God's word comes in that's where all of these other things come in because troubles will find you fear not okay Matthias hi Paul is there any statistics about the number of people you've talked to on your channel since your first videos well the I just the I I mostly have put the conversations videos in one playlist and that playlist has something like 370 videos in it um someone recently has been going through the job videos and leaving comments that's been fun and so there's some repeats in there initially when when I first started doing the randos conversation I was doing five six seven a week that was too many I couldn't sustain it about half of those maybe got posted my randos conversations are between two to four a week right now maybe two-thirds get posted so I've talked to on my guests at least 400 people via Skype or Zoom over these last three years that I talked to people at meetups but that you know as a pastor you talk to people that's what you do and one of the things that I've really appreciated is that the strangeness of the fact that um I found that this crazy YouTube Zoom randos thing is a terrific platform for both for evangelism and pastoral care who'd have thought there are times that I have deeper pastoral care conversations with randos than I might have with members of my church for the whole 23 years I've been here now there's an aspect to that because I'm a stranger I'm a stranger and therapists use that dynamic too so so your therapist is not your friend usually and some of the therapists among us can talk about that if they want to but no so I've I've easily talked to over 400 people in these last three years and and I should say listen to over 400 people in these last three years and it's been a tremendous blessing to me and I hope that I've blessed others through it so on Thursday 29th of April oh no this is your commercial break the bi-weekly German speaking meetup will take place in the bridges of meaning discord server this will be the ninth time we meet and we have thus achieved a certain regularity that is wonderful and a solid core of participants what recommendations do you have for us um to make even more German speaking listeners to your podcast aware of our meetings I can say it right now if you're a German speaking listener to this podcast get to the bridges of meaning discord server and find Matthias and join the conversation John Van Donk he mentioned it briefly at the beginning of my conversation with Clay Leibold John Van Donk has been leading three groups of around 15 people who are focusing on becoming leaders of estuary type groups some of them have groups that are already going others want to form their groups my hope is that after Covid John Van Donk and Job and I can make good on our trip our west coast tour and meet up with some groups in Portland and Seattle and Vancouver and I hope that happens so we can encourage those groups I am hoping that once Covid lifts I'm sort of thinking about doing some conventions here at Living Stones now they'll have to be small because our facility is small and they will be paid for because there'll be expenses you know I'm thinking about bringing in people like for Vakey, Peugeot, others who are sort of in our community and having a conference or having some conferences here and so for a bigger price you can be in the room and you know I don't like having money be a boundary so that maybe we'll have certain number of slots that are scholarships so maybe you can do something to apply to get a golden ticket or something like that maybe if we make enough money we can even find ways of throwing an airfare I mean there's lots and lots of things we can do I mean we do this stuff in churches sometimes so I'd like to do some I'd like to do some events here at Living Stones where all of you can meet each other and be in the same room and get to know each other so we've got ideas for that Vendank has a access to a large facility in southern California up in the Palm Desert region where we could do with do this where in fact there are dormitories and such and you know people wouldn't need to go off to hotels or camp or anything like that but we could do a bunch of different things so there's lots of cool stuff we can do in the future with this and I'm super excited that there's a German language group you know there are of course some Dutchmen involved a lot of this will be English but I think as we go on into the future we should think about ways to encourage each other and do some creative things so I'd love to see different estuaries and so I haven't released that video yet but I got a video of a conversation I'm going to release with someone who snagged a rando slot almost right away Ney was showing around the server and this is where you can see this is how you can sign up for Talks with Paul and they go there and boom there was a rando slot open and Ney's like they're never open and so he grabbed it we had a great conversation and I'll post it maybe next week and you know Sherry not the mom of the discord but the artist in New England started a group of she's got like 21 24 people who are now talking about the arts and artistry and and and you know that you know in that video that I had the conversation I had with she started that group this is exactly what I want to see I can't start groups about art you know when Ndung said I really want to have some have some meetings where I can train up people who can start estuary groups I said John if you wait for me it'll never happen and I'll just slow it down start it you know go for it do it show the initiative grab at it don't wait for me just do it and maybe it'll blow up maybe it'll become a catastrophe maybe maybe some horrendous thing will happen and someday someone will say well you know that Paul VanderKlaai is the one that started that whole estuary mess but usually if you're going to do anything of any significance you're going to make some messes too so I'm just thrilled to pieces that a bunch of people have come around sherry and and they've had a couple of meetings already and they're doing more so yeah get that German group going and if you're a German language speaker and you're listening to this get to the discord server and find Mathias and find out what's going on or maybe Mathias's breath smells on discord and you can't stand him so you're going to start a breakaway group go for it just start something get going do something you know we just do a lot of talking because that's what you can do on YouTube you can talk the real cool stuff happens when you do so I think it's great all right Joe allowed it Catherine Paul the US government has released video of UFOs they're expected to make an announcement about them in June if intelligent life is confirmed to originate from a place other than earth how would you process that as a pastor well actually it's coming into my sermon this week a little bit so you can catch something in the rough draft and I've been thinking a lot about doing a video on this I think it's going to be interesting I think the phenomena itself is very enlightening too so Jordan Peterson did a conversation with Michael Shermer hasn't gotten a lot of views it was not on Jordan Peterson's channel but Shermer goes into the resurrection and Shermer you know they it was it seemed like a very good faith conversation and I might do a little commentary on that at some point it gets mentioned in my sermon for this Sunday too so it'll be out excuse me it'll be out on the rough draft this Saturday because I have to record the rough draft this afternoon but yeah there's a lot to think about CS Lewis speculated about this the universe is big but our god is the god of not just this world so it's gonna be interesting god writes the best stories could be that there'll be some very interesting other stories coming into this one we've played around with them in science fiction we'll see where they go it'll be stranger than anything we've dreamed of so I think it's wild and rocket oh what a cool nice logo I haven't seen this welcome and rocket I haven't seen you before here so thanks for coming in Paul if you could make it financially possible if you could make it financially feasible how would you stop being a pastor of a church to focus on this community you have built I probably could make it financially feasible now if I really worked at it I had a conversation with with with someone who has worked at the nexus of I don't see him in the chat room right now but he actually stopped by living stones had a conversation with him this week he's worked at the nexus of Christian ministry and technology for a while and in fact I he and I first made our acquaintance when before Tim Keller started writing books he started a Tim Keller wiki and I was one of the administrators on his Tim Keller wiki tracking down Tim Keller recorded things on the internet and posting links to it on the wiki so that's how he and I first met I probably won't leave this church until either I can have you know I don't know what happens to this church in the future it could be that after COVID that you know suddenly we get all kinds of new families so I plan to keep pastoring while there is a church here now it could be that let's say if the church suddenly doubled or tripled in size and you know right now the church budget's about a hundred and thirty thousand dollars that's about size so about what it takes to keep this church going a year it's not a huge amount of money and you know this church sort of runs on the cheap so but I feel a commitment to the people of this church you know they have loved me and stood by me through thick and thin for 23 years and I love them and I want to stand by them now if let's say this church doubled or tripled in size oh my gosh what would we do with a building that's the problem with a physical church you got it you got to deal with buildings and stuff but this this church could double or triple in size easily or quadruple in size and still have this facility work because this facility was built when the church was larger years ago if that happened I would probably hire staff to replace me in some of the preaching and in fact that would be a great thing because I would love to I'm sure there would be people out there who would want to sort of get excited about this ministry and learn from it and so I could easily bring on interns and residents to do more ministry here so that the people here would be cared for cared for and I'd have more time to build this ministry around the country and around the world that might happen might happen that so when you look around this place on a Sunday morning a lot of the folks in here are in their 70s 80s and 90s you know five years from now is Livingstone still going to be here as that church or will it change I have no idea one of the things I do know is that when it comes to doing ministry like this the the church is a great place to do it from in terms of just how stuff works in America I'll say it that way so what God is going to do God is going to do and I hope to be able to support and encourage other groups around the country and around the world to start I don't know where those groups go either and I think they're going to be different and right away when I started this you know when I talked about estuary I said I don't want there to be the estuary what I see John Van Dock doing is cool what I see Sherry doing is cool what I see Joey and you all who are running this discord doing is cool you'll notice I do have administrator rights but I don't use them because I'd probably break something and Joey would have to fix it anyway so my MO has always been I want to start things that will go on their own with or without me so if I would have the time to encourage you know I see what Sam and Hank are doing in their little videos about the church fathers and how Sam's developing his channel I look at I don't take any credit for Mary's channel or the meaning code channel or all these other channels that have started but they're all estuary like to me when I listen to Mary Cohen explaining her Catholic faith to the world in Mary's wonderful way I think that's beautiful I look at partners like Peugeot and his efforts and John Vervecki and his efforts you see it wouldn't be an estuary if we didn't have Vervecki and the you know Manuel and Mark and the you know awakening from the meaning crisis people around us who aren't you know who aren't Christians yet when they all become Christians we have to go out and find more non-Christians so that we can have some credibility as an estuary so yeah what would make it financially feasible I think it will probably grow naturally and the truth is if in if we all got really hot and bothered and determined about this in December or January of 2020 we would have had our legs swept out from under us during COVID so and as it was the the northern part of the west coast tour got cancelled because of COVID but I expect stuff will happen and I think it'll be cool I think it'll be chaotic there'll be stumbles there'll be regrets there'll be all those things but I'm a strong believer in God's providence and so yeah that's that's my take from watching over the last few years it seems as though the answer is yes you may have elaborated on this previously but I would have missed it would you talk about the dynamics of time we've spent in the online thing versus time in your congregation how do you feel about it how is it a tricky question I know it's a tricky question to answer it is you mentioned pastors become disconnected from their church has this happened to you I don't think it's happened to me my church is small and many of the people are older if you're a pastor of a church plant with lots of peoples in their 20s and 30s you got divorces to deal with you got affairs to deal with you got anxious parents and their kids to deal with we have almost no youth ministry here or children's ministry because we have almost no children I have a church full of older people many of whom have been Christians for a long long time and they need some attention they need me to listen to their squabbles they need me to encourage them they need me to bury them to pray for them to hold their hand when they're sick and to check up on them that's what they need from me but without this YouTube aspect this church would have almost no evangelistic outreach and this church would like to have an evangelistic outreach I shouldn't say that because it's got the coffee break ministry with just a small group women's ministry that really is a very estuary like ministry in many ways it's a bible study so at the same time this church has been tremendously supportive and excited that by virtue of my work this church has been able to impact the lives of many many people all around the world and they're proud of that now hardly any of them listen to my videos because gosh who could understand it unless you're in the middle of this whole all these crazy internet conversations but they trust me and they've encouraged me and supported me in this and you know often you know when people want to express gratitude for my ministry many of them especially the Christians have financially supported living stones when COVID hit in from March 2020 to February 2021 that's the heart of the COVID hit we lost some members because at this point people hit an age or a situation where they basically said can't really keep coming to living stones anymore I don't even know if she can be open the next year I really need to find a local church a lot of those people were significant financial givers the tithes and offerings given by people in the online community have made up the difference have made up the difference and so from the the bank account I checked in February 2020 or March 2020 to February 2021 we had $75 less in the bank in February 2021 which I thought was felt like a miracle because we've been spending money on cameras and screens and software so that we could stream the church and do all this stuff and God provided God provided through you and so if you're if you pay American taxes and you give to living stones we have online giving the links in all my videos you know you get a tax receipt at the end of the year so at this point the relationship between living stones and what I do on my YouTube channel has been very simpatico and I pray it'll continue may or may not you know things happen in little churches they could fire me and if they fired me I would likely try and find a way to do this full time but don't get any ideas in your head about getting me fired because I love these people and these people love me at least they say they do and they've shown it in many different ways over the years so that's that's sort of the story. All right Pastor Tanner, Paul as we move from an evangelicalism that is bound up with enlightenment and left hemisphere how can we move into a Protestantism that embraces story metaphor narrative in the right hemisphere? Lots of Protestants are very right hemisphere haven't you been to a Pentecostal church? They are all about the right hemisphere. God is talking, they are moving, stuff is happening, it's going on all over the world so I'm not worried you know it's so funny because I was reading Carlos Iries and he's talking about yeah the Roman Catholic Church they really doubled down on miracles and it's like have you he's not writing about that this period though but it's you know look at look at the radical reformation they were you know even some of the crazy abusive stuff was miracle laden all over the place that isn't going away not from Christianity not from human beings it's it's baked into us too deep. It seems to me that the traditional apologetics even the presuppositional nature is helpful for laying a foundation but if we want to be effective in our current cultural context we need to push into story metaphor narrative I agree. I think we should index Bible themes I'm thinking we should index Bible themes and narratives you can find a lot of books that have done it already they're all over the place. Perhaps we lean into biblical theology themes biblical theology about 40 50 years ago really unseated systematic theology and has continued to much more be the forefront and you know some some Dutch Calvinists got into this a long time ago biblical theology by Gerhardus Vos for a while taught at Calvin Seminary then I think went to Princeton and then maybe Westminster but yeah biblical theology and and my tradition is also quite big on was quite big on systematic theology but Christians have been working on in almost anything in the Christian world if you think it's new do a little research and you'll find someone's been working in some of it before and the Christian the Christian world is enormous and broad and diverse it's really an incredible thing. It just seems like the utmost importance that we are in largely unmapped territory I think in a lot of ways we are but there's plenty of material that is helpful that we can bring to today and that's the that's the that's you know even you know I tease I don't tease I someday when I get to meet John Vervecky and the person I get to give him a hug and I put my arm around him and you know neither of us will hopefully get COVID from this interaction I just always tell them it's not a fair fight there's so much in the Christian tradition so that when we when we come into what feels like uncharted territory which it is we have so many resources to employ and deploy that it's a it's an embarrassment of riches so I that's my view of it and so often in my channel when I'm working through stuff and you just find that people have been here before I mean I I look at C.S. Lewis Sheldon Van Auken his book A Severe Mercy which I mentioned on the discord server yesterday wasn't recorded or anything like that but all of this stuff that we're doing right now with the meeting crisis Lewis, Tolkien, Sheldon Van Auken it's it's we've this is this is we've been here before and not exactly we all have our own battles to fight but we've got Chesterton and we've got Lewis and we've got Tolkien and you know there's so many Catholic resources I don't know about but you know one of what's been beautiful about reading reformations is you know some of the some of the critics of the book have said he's a little shy on on Protestant missiology and it's like okay I know a lot of that stuff you don't have to I don't need that book to teach me that stuff I look at everything that happened in the Roman Catholic world and it's like wow that's amazing that's incredible I didn't know any of it because you know we just sort of wrote all those Catholics off well again in God's providence even our sinful turning our back on each other led to all kinds of sometimes bad but all kinds of good ministry all around the world and it's you know we are part of God's story and God's mission we do not wield him he wields us so it's that's awfully good to think about going forward into uncharted territory all right LF Bazini in your meeting with libel and vendonk you mentioned that in moving out of modernity we might need to go back and check our foundations hanging out with all these free thinkers all the time how do you um all the time how do you know if you're doing the colonizing or the one being colonized oh yeah very true I get plenty of emails from people warning me don't talk to him don't talk to her don't read this book that's fair enough but I don't know what else to do many heretical movements get started in missionary efforts that's always been a reality in the church and this is a missionary effort I'll get stuff wrong I hope I don't lead people astray that's the real fear but when you're raiding Satan's territory there are risks involved but that's what we're called and I believe I'm called to do so I think about that often you know I I talk to some people and I think gosh this person is smarter than I am they're better read than I am they've got lots of arguments against what I'm bringing to the table so then you just pray these little silent prayers help me help me help me at least let me not let down our side and Lewis wrote about his apologetic efforts he wrote about that he wrote about his apologetic efforts he wrote about that he said you know what what what are these what are these people who don't believe anything have to lose nothing what do we who walk into the arena representing Christ have to lose everything but Christians go into the arena sometimes we're fed to lions but yeah that's a great question I think we need to pray and hold each other accountable so you know I I made a comment you know and I'm honest about this it's not always easy but it is you know what I I know a certain video has sort of leapt beyond our community when I start seeing more dismissive critical angry comments about a video but I actually to me I take that as a good sign and I try to at least to some degree listen to my critics because I can learn from them even the non-Christian critics so don't don't despise even what your enemies bring you I think there's a lesson from the cross in that oh we're getting to the bottom when we got a half hour what are we going to do are we going to have this broad ranging open conversation in the voice chat during the last half hour and we're going to stream that to YouTube what do you think Rick do you think that'll happen Rick says yes all right Valerie how would you recommend how to learn about small group discussions and helping facilitate them Valerie find John Van Donk and get into one of his groups because he's he's got some groups started that do exactly that and and if you don't want to find Van Donk because he's an acquired taste that's job John never listens to this stuff but job will tell him there's tons of Christian materials on small group leadership but probably the best way if you're a member of a local church hopefully COVID will relent and small groups can sort of go back our all small group our small groups have gone to zoom and actually I think some of our small groups will not leave zoom and I think we'll have some insight small groups and some online small groups but get into a small group and churches are always looking for small group leaders and they might have a an apprentice program for learning how to lead small groups the best way to learn how to lead small groups is to do it and if you have people around you that will critique you and give you input you can get good at it so it's a great thing to do hey there's all the questions we made it through all of them does anyone in the voice chat have a question they'd like to ask this is exciting um I have a response please yeah I was I'm late so it didn't get your response to my question but I watched it right now and I must say yeah you're right that the catholic church has centralized as a response to um for this the reformation and that's always something that I kind of not like it I would like a more um like a church where like your small church can have their post religion and make common stuff and that stuff doesn't affect the whole church and there is no um uh like coming down from the pope like I would like a little bit more original independency but when I and when I see what uh like people that actually have this independence that's not what I want yeah like um if I see the the first Vatican council it was trying to respond to modernity and what it did it was again centralization in the pope so they got the infallibility of the pope so like conservatives as to say in order to defend against progressivism has organized valid themselves around the pope um but now we have that popes are getting increasingly progressive and we are getting then the other side of the of the violence yeah I really don't know what to do I look in in the old catholic church they actually call that way they were the ones that rebel against the first Vatican council and like now they ordinate women so they they turn totally modern and yeah so I don't know if you have something to say about that yeah it's it's I I see in the Protestant world it works out the same way centralization people are happy or frustrated with centralization depending on what center is being promoted I see it all the time in the Protestant churches as well I I wonder to what degree the orthodox churches which are not centralized you know that seems to be part of part of their dynamic and but it's also true that say for it so so New England Puritans these Anglican non-conformists that go to America many of those Puritans eventually became and this is the story I heard in my Calvinist circles many of those Puritans became liberal because they had a decentralized structure and so the congregational churches became Unitarian you know New England Transcendentalism sort of ran through New England and destroyed what was a bastion of Puritanism and now just a few churches like my brother-in-law's church Park Street church and right there on the Boston Common they continue to be small orthodox so yeah it's all these structures that we have to try to maintain something the structures themselves become players for better or for worse so that's great question it's a great question all right David Engelvogel Paul what's your thought on sentient artificial intelligence I block you your mic's open um I don't have a lot of thoughts on it you know to what degree do you mean sentient do you mean conscious and and some people in some of the discussions I've heard about artificial intelligence and I haven't gone into that a lot have questions about okay would does AI really need consciousness and would we want to program would we want to try to program consciousness into a would we want to try to program consciousness into AI because that sounds like it could really get complicated rather just sort of keep AI unconscious to do the kinds of things that AI is doing now so yeah I it's not my not really my area of expertise but um yeah so if I don't have a lot of thoughts on it you just don't get a lot sorry but lots of stuff on YouTube about it it's interesting question I'd like to know if you can if if you get AI to a degree that you would be able to call it Christian I think about that on a related note have you been following uh all the extraterrestrial stuff yeah Katherine asked about that I've been following some of it and so like I said some of it's going to show up in my sermon this week just a couple of comments and I've been seriously thinking about doing a video on some of it doing some commentary on um uh Lex Fridman did a video with a Harvard scholar who wrote a book and I thought that conversation was extremely interesting because it gets into these questions of biases and knowledge and in some ways it mirrors even some of these atheist questions about the resurrection of Jesus Christ so yeah it's it's Peugeot keeps saying it's the ride's gonna go wild so uh to the degree that Peugeot is reading the patterns the ride is looking more and more wild but some of the yeah go ahead sorry I was just gonna add on the we were having a bit of a discussion on the sort of AI question over on the symbolic world discord and the sort of approach that we took about it is um whether like an algorithmic structure could have an experience of the logos like the the lowercase l logos that sort of imminent principle that sort of comes up and I mean we're our sort of conclusion was you know that basically that a logos and a telos must be imposed on these you know neural networks and artificial intelligence externally and so they can't you know there's not really a sense in which they can self-generate a uh a logos if that makes sense it does make sense and a lot of that seems true of us as well I mean I've I've thought for a while that a big part of this meaning crisis is and this has been played out in how many science fiction stories we begin to look at these machines that are doing something that sort of looks like thinking and then we ask ourselves to what degree am I not a machine and I mean this this gets theologically interesting very quickly so it's it's gonna be interesting you know what was I thinking about um you know agency and personhood is such an interesting topic and that's that's really what we're going to be the the AI stuff is sort of provoking those kinds of questions and it's questions that we've never really faced in the way that we're facing them now so and that and that way pastor Tanner's right this is a lot of unmapped territory so it's interesting stuff anybody else got anything otherwise we could we could end early today that's you know we got 15 minutes I have not a not not a question um you you talk about the Orthodox churches that they are decentralized and somehow still conservative and my question is is that maybe because they are from the east and like they don't have that much contact with modernity and that if the Orthodox church were to stay in America for more 100 200 years that they would inevitably also get modernized if they would be able to resist it well here's here's a funny dynamic well here's here's a funny dynamic one of the videos that some certain of my old videos continue to get played by small numbers but still played and one of them is basically the question it's a mentions mold bug it's a video with some mentions mold bug in it of and from the distributist about why do we just keep drifting left yeah so part of part of the reason that we notice the Orthodox churches that are conservative is those are the only churches left and if you look at Protestantism you see churches that drift left they drift left off into oblivion for the most part you know the the the the Unitarians are just sort of always sort of in the twilight of existence you go you drive in any and so here in the United States in New England so I've got you know my mother's from New England so if you go to New England you drive through these beautiful little towns and they've got this beautiful village green and on the green they've got this beautiful building it's a church it's just lovely and there's nothing going on in there on Sunday in most of those churches there's nothing going on so why and then you know you find some strip mall someplace and you find this Pentecostal big box church you know growing like gangbusters they're conservative so the fact that I mean and so then we we sort of drop in at a certain point and we see churches sort of going off the left edge into oblivion and then we see all of these strong conservative churches well part of that is because and and church growth people there was a church growth movement in the middle of the 20th century that grew into the seeker movement and Lyle Schaller was one of the lights of that movement and he made the observation that churches that are culturally contrarian grow and that sounds counterintuitive because you would think and this is what people think all the time well if our church just aligns itself with the prevailing cultural orthodoxies then people will come in because all of our countercultural orthodoxies are preventing people from coming in now all of those statements well that your countercultural orthodoxies are preventing people from coming in because they'd say I'd never go to a church that believes that but the point is if your church basically is in alignment with all of the prevailing cultural orthodoxies you don't need a church so you won't have one I mean this is a mistake that the atheists just keep making over and over and over again and I watch them do it I kind of chuckle and say have you you haven't figured that out yet you don't need a church you already got universities and governments and you know all kinds of other institutions all kinds of platforms that are doing your bidding you don't need a church it's the it's the nutcases and contrarians and people who are sticking out from society and standing against it they need churches and so their churches flourish because the people in the churches are committed to it because the only way they can continue to maintain their countercultural identity and belief is with a church and part of the reason churches flourish in America is because there's a strong tradition that is legal and financial and many other ways by which contrarian groups can organize themselves as churches and have a bit of legal standing and legal buffer in this nation from prevailing orthodoxies and when you think about that and this is true all across the board you know Mormons Jehovah's Witnesses you know I drive through Stockton sometimes and right by highway four which is the cross down expressway Buddhist church and it's like why would the Buddhists grab a Christian word like church and plaster it on their building well that Buddhist church was probably not started by a bunch of people who were pretty much western white folks who kind of wanted to play with Buddhism it was probably started by Japanese immigrants who got to this country and felt you know especially during the second world war really uncomfortable and they're like we we want a place that we can go to reinforce and cherish and uphold and educate our young people and our children and our values let's start a church and nobody sidled up to the immigrants and said you shouldn't really call it a church that's a Christian thing nope I mean because I I'd half expect to say well they already got the word mosque so I haven't seen an Islamic church yet but I would say probably a lot of mosques in America act like churches because churches provided the template that the other religious groups follow along with so that's why you know the orthodox come to America and whoo they're the they're the young hot sexy new kid on the block even though they're really old and I just watched that I just think ah that's cool that's cool I'm not going to be upset by that we'll see where it goes you say that what your this observation universal in space and time not just America context because what I come to mind is like something like the Francis Cans were pretty much like a critique of the of the corrupt monasticism or the correct church and then they embraced actual poverty and what was not that much practice in the standard church of the time yeah it's funny because you know you had reading these books about Catholicism and a lot of church history I didn't know because it's sort of masked by Protestant bigotry against Catholics you know the the Roman Catholics practiced the kind of diversity you find within Protestantism they just did it within the fold and Protestants just kept starting new things outside of the fold so or kept starting new folds so you look at monastic movements orders um you know the the the I'm I'm really enjoying reading Roman Catholic history because it's a wonder to behold and and y'all fight like cats and dogs in that church of yours and I see that today and you know people wondering if the pope is Catholic that just cracks me up but yeah there it is all right pastor Tanner sneaks in with another question can anything be done about nominal observance I'm trying to think what percentage of sermons in Protestant churches are really simply intended to address nominal observance the irony what 80 percent 70 percent the irony of which is most of those sermons are most but it's the non-nominal people that have to endure the abuse and the and the scourges about nominalism because the nominal people aren't there on Sunday to to come in for their whipping nominalism is nominalism tends to be what happens when for a whole myriad of reasons the gospel the church all of the motivations have lost traction and so it's just sort of all of the motivations have lost traction and so it's just sort of left over momentum that is sort of winding out and that's a that's an important part of of the dynamic western individualism yeah has made the church consumeristic yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah and so churches sort of double down and then get I mean the seeker movement sort of got really said it was like oh you want to be consumers watch us we're ready to cater to your consumption we'll set ourselves up as a business a consumer oriented society you're going to fill out forms um and then so the church so everybody's like everybody's acting like a consumer so the church starts acting like a religious service vendor and then a whole bunch of people are like the church isn't supposed to act like that and so then they start all kinds of churches that are decidedly anti-consumeristic to appeal to the anti-consumeristic aspect of the audience I mean you just watch this stuff go and um and then we're going to be really really anti-consumeristic and we're going to be so proud because nobody comes to our church we're not catering to any of those consumers anybody who walks in our door we're going to offend that's just what we do so oh got a few little questions and then I'll wrap it up I'm learning as we go April 23 there we go ah too late Chad don't answer that um a quick question would you prefer to be part of one imperfect fold or a multiplicity of imperfect folds that's a sly question um you know can you can you repeat it oh would I would I prefer to be part of one imperfect fold or a multiplicity of imperfect folds he's riffing off my um comment about how the catholics did multiplication within their fold you know it was so I'll tell you when I saw that um oh shoot what was his name he was the editor of Christianity Today he just after he retired from being editor of Christianity Today one of the flagship platforms of evangelical Christianity started by none other than Mark LeFevres patron saint Billy Graham he joins the Roman Catholic Church this guy was a Jordan Peterson fan too um I saw that and I thought huh you know Catholicism such an interesting beast I shouldn't say beast it triggers a lot of protestants um we've been reading Luther such an interesting church on one hand I look at it and I say oh my goodness what a mess and then you look at some of what it has to offer and some of its traditions of of piety of thinking of wisdom and you say wow that's impressive I uh I I I just can't see myself being Roman Catholic I'm such a rough person I you know I don't know if there'll be a Christian Reformed Church to be a member of 10 years from now this this I'm doing a conversation next week with um Vendonk Vendonk's always getting me into trouble with Vendonk and the the executive pastor of his Christian Reformed Church in Southern California and a friend of ours who's a lawyer in the um in the Salem Oregon area he's been on the channel before about you know what happens to the Christian Reformed Church after this same sex marriage fight um I don't know that could shred it um I have no idea what's going to become of the Christian Reformed Church in the next five to ten years there'll probably be some successor denomination that emerges from it my classes will be a part of that and I'll follow my tribe and um Living Stones will will follow our tribe um probably towards the conservative end because the liberal churches don't have any staying power they usually last if they have an endowment or a building and if they don't have that they die because nobody needs them so I I don't know if I'd rather do what but I am what I am and I am where I am and unless God moves me and God can I expect I'll be part of these Dutch Calvinists I don't have no plans to follow Peter Crave I don't have no plans to follow Peter Crave oh look at all these questions go ahead yep yep uh JBP, Pajot, even for Vakey there's this there's power in the ritual right and there's power in some of the sacramental aspect of the church that had come through even in the Protestant context for hundreds of years and we certainly have our our certain rituals now right there's no no doubt we've developed these new things but they're not tried, trued, and tested and quite frankly they're more consumeristic do you do you think that you know this is different than trying to have a service that matches the culture but understanding like leaning back in more into some of the older practices that have developed that quite frankly I think help develop some of those things that could help you be more observant because there's transformation in them you know like at the end of the JBP Bishop Barron he talked about Sammy and the Rose or Tammy and the Rosary and I'm starting to do some of those things and they just helped me in practical application so I realized that in some ways the Orthodox Church has given me more of what my Protestant Methodist Church was giving me in my youth yeah yeah yeah no you're exactly right you're exactly right you know it's funny because if you look at let's say the the massive transformation that happened in Protestant churches over the last 20 years in terms of guitar music drums I kid with smoke machines some churches really do have them but you go to sort of the expressive big box which is very low church rock music expressive music you look at that and you can look at that and say well that's an adaptation for an artistic sensibility in popular culture that churches adapted to in order to continue to reach them but the opposite then came right after it which was and I saw this in Christian informed churches too the first so the church I pastor was planted in 1963 and it was very much like my father's church it was very much a second wave anti-racism racial reconciliation church we want the people in this church wanted to know if black folks and white folks could work could could worship together if we could break out of the sort of implicit Jim Crow segregationism in America and the body of Christ could reflect the racial diversity of America and the church could heal and represent the healing of the races and so my father's church Sacramento Christian reform that was the former name of this church started then and that was sort of they were sort of alternative churches for black folks and white folks the second church planted in the Sacramento area Granite Springs even just look at the name the name of the first church in Sacramento and the Christian reform church was Sacramento Christian reformed and if there had been two of them the name of this church would have been first Christian reformed church of Sacramento I mean denominational moniker everything right there and I could talk about liturgy and that whole thing because I lived that in Patterson in my father's church check that off on your bingo Granite Springs church was the second church planted here in Sacramento and that church came with Bill Hybl's seeker church methodology so their Sunday morning service was a seeker service they had this little skit you know as the intro to the sermon they had sort of rockish jazzish music it was out in a suburban area of new housing developments and the church grew over the that church was started in 1991 that's when the church planter got there so now we're 30 years in same church planter is still at that church my friend Kevin Adams he has transitioned that church to liturgy weekly communion he's good friends with the orthodox priest just a little ways from him I wouldn't be surprised if my friend has an icon in his office sitting on his shelf yeah that's you know and I've of crc ministers I'm probably a little high in historical knowledge and sensitivity and so when I walk into a christianity foreign minister's office and I see an icon I sort of blink because wow this is an icon this is a tradition that is I was a few generations downstream from the iconoclasm but that's an amazing thing and so the second church we planted in the city they wanted to be like a cell church and they became kind of an intensive piety christian formation church the third church wanted to do the seeker thing they were just a little they just really didn't catch the wave in time they were a little you know if you're trying to surf and you're too late on the wave that's kind of what happened to that church plant and then we had we had another wave of church plants after that all of those other church plants do weekly liturgy weekly communion our davis church plant for example you know that's what these church plants are doing and that's a world from what was doing happening in 1990 and it only took 10 years for that change to happen here so I think I think christians and churches are responding to the culture and it's oh no they're responding to the culture missiologically and so what you what you talk about lance it's going on all over north america right now and so I was in I was in Australia and warren you know my friend warren uh who I stayed with he's been on the channel you know warren grew up in a dispensational church eventually he made his way to he went to labrie in europe eventually he made his way to became pentecostal and baptist and now he's worshiping in highly liturgical anglican it's like the first cathedral of melbourne australia and so when I stayed with him and his wife when I did that conference in australia I went to church with him on sunday and you know I took him I took communion I'm kneeling at a bar and and it's like I'm there I'm just thinking oh wow how the times have changed and so I talked to the the priest the anglican priest there and I said I've had the same conversations on twitter with some anglican priests in in in the uk and I said you might not believe this but if in fact culture sort of starts in California and rolls across the pacific ocean into australia which in many ways is the land of hillsong hold on your day is coming he kind of looks at me like you're out of your mind everybody here is just apo for hillsong music and what's happening like that and hey I love hillsong music I love praise and worship you know um you know Jonathan Peugeot if I if I go to church with Jonathan Peugeot and the with the the christian acrobats descend from the ceiling in a christian Cirque du Soleil Jonathan Peugeot might run out of the room but I'll probably laugh um so but no we we need the ritual we need the structure we need the organization and it's just that things are swinging so fast and so far right now so you know God God will keep his church it'll be a bumpy ride it'll be messy it always is but God knows what he's doing we should trust him and we should follow that lamb wherever he goes so oh Charles Williams boy there's a lot of last minute questions um have you done any reading on Charles Williams I've done some there's a great book on the inklings and so I know a bit about Charles Williams but in terms of let's say the big four uh Lewis I know more about Lewis than I know about any of the others then would probably come maybe told and would probably come Tolkien and then barfield and I know the least of the big four about Charles Williams so I've got some of his books I haven't found them terribly easy to read but who knows maybe I'll get more into Williams and barfield as we go I've learned a lot about barfield so cool stuff all right that's it um it's 1208 we've gone a little long thank you all for joining us in the bridges of meaning question and answer this little Friday tradition and um after this um Josiah Gorter Josiah Gorter is in the room and he is a church planter in Sacramento and Josiah has the world's worst timing in terms of church planting because you just try and plant a church during a pandemic see how well that goes but Josiah is here and if you've got any more questions about at least the Christian Reformed Church he's from he's a real CRC or he grew up in west Michigan they're the real thing I grew up in New Jersey that's kind of second tier so um so Josiah can answer any questions we've got lots of other rooms in the discord server where you can break up and in meeting rooms and go have conversations and play games and do kinds all kinds of other things so until next Friday thanks for joining and okay Rick you can end transmission