https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=WEdqycEr5hg

 Hi, this is Paul. If you're watching this, it means you have found my YouTube channel. Now from the likes of comments that I often receive from first time viewers, you might find this channel confusing or even annoying. And since YouTube gives me this little space to do an introductory video and since I've been making videos that have been watched by more than just a couple of handful of people now for a few years, it's probably time I did an introduction video for my channel to explain to people who stumble across me just what is going on here. Also, Rick always wants me to do better branding and explaining for the sake of the channel and my church. So here goes. Well, I, because I really am a pretty bad YouTuber, but who am I and what am I doing with my channel? That's what this video is going to tell you. Well, I'm the pastor of Livingstone's Christian Reform Church in Sacramento, California. That's a Christian Reform Church. You can look that up on Wikipedia if you're curious about my denomination. I've been here in Sacramento doing this job since 1997 and the address is here on the screen in case you have any interest in it. Before this, I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic. I grew up in Patterson, New Jersey. My father was a Christian Reform minister and my grandfather was as well. The picture, if you're watching the video, are a bunch of really good friends who raised me in many ways. These are some of the people that I grew up with at the Northside Community Chapel in Patterson, New Jersey. My father's story, Patterson, Dominican Republic, all of these have come to be the PVK bingo that some of the regular viewers play. My history on YouTube started for a number of years. I used a little webcam on top of a PC that I'd roll into the sanctuary. I'd use Hangouts on the air and I would just record some sermons because people sometimes couldn't catch the sermons. The sound was terrible. The video was terrible, but it's better than nothing. I did that for a number of years and maybe had 10 subscribers at that point for a number of years. Then about four and a half years ago or so, Freddie, a member of my church, comes along and says, hey, Pastor Paul, how about you and me do a TV show? Fred had had a radio career, a brush with fame, with Kid Chris. Kid Chris apparently now is in the Boston area. I was just talking to Charles J about that this past Sunday. Freddie wanted to do a TV show and he was doing public access TV. I didn't want to go down and do public access TV. I said, I'll tell you what, Fred, let me take my smartphone and I'll make little videos and we'll put them on YouTube. You'll find me on Facebook, but I almost never go to Facebook. Sorry about that. I just can't stand it. I keep my account around so that I have streaming access for the people who watch the church service via the church website and all that got set up in connection with my Facebook account. Anyway, that's how the Freddie and Paul show started. We did that for over a year before what's next happened. At that point, I was about up to 15 subscribers on YouTube, mostly friends and family who would tune in for the Freddie and Paul show, which usually came about once a week. Every now and then I would play around with the YouTube and just get an idea for a video and just try things out to see what would happen. Well, in early 2017, I discovered Jordan Peterson and I think I found him through a posting or two on Rod Drear's blog. I was quite fascinated by what was going on. Why is this unit of University of Toronto professor kvetching about non-binary pronouns? Then he starts doing a biblical series. I thought, what's a closet evangelical is teaching in the University of Toronto? Then I'd listen to him. This isn't anything like what I had heard before. I didn't know anything about it. It really quite hooked me, especially the biblical series. Every week I was really excited about the next one coming out. I watched all his classroom lectures, maps of meaning, personalities, and I was really hooked and I wanted to talk about this with people, but I had a hard time finding other people who wanted to talk about this and people who were as excited as I was. At that time I was reading Neil Postman's Amusing Ourselves to Death and I thought, there's something about this guy in YouTube. These things sort of go along with each other. I'd been playing around with different ways that I could sort of make a passable video. Not much of it very good. I finally settled on a video capture software and a decent microphone. Then the first video I made, Jordan Peterson raises three questions in me. Didn't get a lot of views. Then the second one, a pastor comments on Jordan Peterson's biblical series and that one really took off. That was quite unexpected, because like I said, I had 15 subscribers for the Freddie and Paul show and now suddenly talking about Jordan Peterson as a pastor on YouTube sort of set my channel. The next day I woke up and I had like 300 subs and it's like, what's going on with this? That just continued to grow and then emails started to come in and I started responding to emails and responding to comments and it was all very strange, but the comments were interesting. I finally had people to talk to Jordan Peterson about. Some friends around me suggested I start a meetup and so that began. I'll talk about that in a little bit. I just kept making YouTube videos because why not? I especially initially just made commentary videos on Jordan Peterson's biblical series and I tried to coordinate them with what I knew about the Bible and what I knew about philosophy and history. Those of you who follow my channel know I've always enjoyed questions about theology and philosophy and history and so just started making videos. Now the first Jordan Peterson meetup I held in my church in January 2018 and a dozen people showed up and I thought, this is all very strange and Rick is one of the guys who showed up here. That's where I first met Rick. He's right there in the middle actually so Rick is real and some of these guys stuck. Jay, who's in front of me there, was already a member of this church, but a lot of the other people were just brand new. I was having coffee with people in town who had found my video and wanted to talk about Jordan Peterson and then in February we had another meetup and a whole other group of people showed up. A lot of the current regulars showed up in that meeting. Tyler and Joey and James, a whole bunch of the people that pop up in my channel every now and then are at the Discord or you'll meet if you come to one of our Sacramento estuary meetings. I just rebranded it. We're getting the live meetings going again. My first conversation with Jonathan Peugeot happened in February 2018. He only had about 4,000 subs at that point and I only had a little over 1,000. I didn't even know what a Nikon Carver was or I started watching his videos and I was mostly confused by them. I had no idea what he was talking about but some people suggested, oh you should talk to Jonathan Peugeot so I barely knew how to say his name. You'll find that in the early videos. Sometimes I look at those early videos and I think, oh they're so cringy I want to take them down but more fun just to leave them up and enjoy the cringe. Then somebody with a Patreon slot gave me a chance for a half hour conversation with Jordan Peterson which I took and which was quite lovely. It was a lovely conversation. He's a lovely man to meet and every time I've met him and had exchanges with him either via email or the like, no I don't really have his email address for me to share with you. The connection was messed up right away and that kind of impacted the way the whole conversation rolled out. He's very generous and honest and to my surprise when someone gave me a VIP ticket when he was coming to Sacramento he even recognized me so that was kind of cool. Then the first Rando's conversations, I'd been having Rando's conversations for a few months by that point just talking to people on Skype and Zoom, just having pastoral conversations and then I was talking to Nathan and I said would it be okay if I'd share our video and he said yes and so that started and eventually the Calendly system got started. There is a link in all of my notes where you can sign up for a Rando slot. Now the Rando slots are always full. They always look full and the reason for that is the way Calendly works and my calendar works and my schedule works, I keep them closed until a week or two ahead of time and then I open some up and they almost all go within 24 hours of me opening them up. I'm sorry about that. It's the only way I've learned over the years I can work it because if I just let Calendly fill up my calendar then I don't have time to do things like my day job or other videos or church meetings or things like that. So that's why they always look closed and you just have to sort of go back and check them now and then and see if any open up and tip for you, check earlier in the week rather than later because it's usually about Monday morning. I kind of look ahead to my schedule and think how much time am I going to have and do I have time for Rando slots and yeah so then I open them up and then they go. That's usually the way it happens so if you want to get a Rando slot that's how you do it. A lot of my channel are what I call commentary or monologue videos where I'm either playing a video and leaving comments on it or I'm talking out loud. Now I do some planning. I make a PowerPoint. For years I've used PowerPoint for preaching just because it helps me both have the combination of a degree of spontaneity but also not just get lost in my ADHD. So it kind of makes some guardrails so that I can hit all the points that I'm thinking about. All of these are rough drafts. I almost never use a script. I've thought about making some scripted videos. Maybe I will at some point but for me that's not the purpose of what I use this channel. I am thinking out loud and the videos that you will find are some of the ideas that I'm thinking about that sort of reached a point where I decide to make a video and that point and availability in my time and schedule meant I was able to make a video and so they seem rather random, rather haphazard. They sort of wander around and I know a good many of you wish I were more disciplined in bringing certain things to an end or some conclusion. I hope to do that someday but it will probably have to be in writing and I really unless I've never had a sabbatical since I was ordained in 1991. Part of that's my fault. Part of that's just a little church and I think if I would take three or six months off I don't know how they'd pay me and I don't know why they'd pay me and I'm afraid I wouldn't have a job to go back to. So I've never had a sabbatical. If I did take a sabbatical I'd probably work on a book because before I did videos I blogged and if you want to read some of my old blogs they're on leadingchurch.com that blog is mostly a filing cabinet for when I find things. It's a link list in many ways for just thoughts and ideas and links and if you go to that blog and think these are all things I endorse or am promoting you're wrong there too. I just put things up that I find interesting or it might become a sermon illustration or I might want to write about it and so that's how I use that blog. The real benefit for this channel for me I'm a very selfish YouTuber because I use this I use YouTube as a thinking community and the real benefit for me is that doing videos sort of puts me in a flow state and it generates ideas and connections and language for me and if I do it in front of a camera it's recorded and if I do it publicly you respond and so every day I look at YouTube comments and I read them. I can't say I read them all but between YouTube and Twitter I found it to be a fairly a fairly time strategic way of gleaning responses from you and I don't mind negative comments at all. Negative comments give me information it's data in terms of my big five personality I'm very high in openness and I'm very low in negative emotions so people and in my regular life dealing with the homeless and as a pastor people regularly hate me and it doesn't really bother me that much. I've got a pretty I've got a pretty solid ego so the real benefit for me of making these videos is sitting down thinking out loud maybe reading maybe responding to a video and trying to take what's often sort of difficult to conceptualize and put it into other words and put it out there and y'all play with me and it's really cool and so just at our most recent in-person meetup a number of people had watched my some of my marriage equality videos and they had things to say about it and that was awesome so that's why I use my channel and that's why I ramble and so if you're going to YouTube looking for listicles and finished products and things that don't have rabbit trails and lack of rambling unsubscribe and go somewhere else because at least for now this is what you're going to get. Now will this change in the future? I have no idea maybe it will maybe I'll get disciplined and write scripts and speak with much more care and caution into the video maybe that will come someday maybe it won't I don't know that is what this is what I do with this channel and it works for me and again I said I'm a very selfish YouTuber when I say this works for me it's not about getting lots of subs or getting fat patreon stacks of cash or you know paving the church in gold it's about ideas it's about learning it's about growing it's about figuring out the world that is what my channel is about this is my learning project I don't know how to say that anymore clearly and for those of you who would like to think along with me or learn with me or tell me I'm all wet or complain about me all of that is absolutely fine that's just what this channel is about I don't really think of myself as a content creator I think of myself as a public mouthy thinker that's what I'm doing here and if along the way people become Christians and or want to engage with the ideas of Christianity or they become better Christians listening to me that's great I love that so I send my videos out and you comment and respond and I get a sense of what's true false helpful etc along the way out of the meetups has grown the estuary project and so you will find under the estuary playlist lots of videos about that and sort of what grew out of my local meetups and other people starting Jordan Peterson meetups has been this estuary project now estuary I use that that term quite intentionally because estuaries are places where freshwater water and salt water mix and if you think in sort of Peugeotian terms about the church as a city on a hill and water runs down and into the sea that's the state of California there's lots of little and big estuaries in the state of California and so I think churches need estuaries and what I mean by that is churches need spaces for open conversations that aren't necessarily specifically or explicitly evangelistic they might be people deconstructing from the church who don't quite want to leave the church but just can't stand church services anymore and they can go to an estuary and talk about their angst they might be people who are curious about Christianity and want to kind of come in and nose around a little or they might just be people who want to have important conversations about what's going on in their life or in this world or in the culture now because of the way that this formed a lot of this stuff has sort of gathered around Jordan Peterson and he became kind of a lightning rod that gathered a whole bunch of people who probably wouldn't have been organized in other ways to have interesting conversations with one another and so my friend John Van Donk eventually I never say this right eventually founded the Estuary Host Support Network which has become sort of a an incubator training space for estuary leaders and now we have a link of estuary groups you can find that there's always links in my notes section on my videos and the that estuary link is down there and so the that sort of also grew out of the Bridges of Meaning Discord server which some of the individuals in the local meetup here started because they wanted to be able to afford meetup spaces for other people online and so that's where Bridges of Meaning came from and that's been its own thing almost every Friday I do a question and answer there on the Discord I'm not usually doing just question and answer on Patreon or like a lot of the other people are I'd rather do that more in an estuary type setting so that's why I do it on the Discord server so you can look for those videos the question the PVK question and answer videos the randos conversations are some of my favorite videos because whereas the commentary and monologue videos are me talking about stuff that's on the internet or stuff that I'm reading or stuff that I'm thinking about the randos conversation it was it was Cassidy who kind of coined that here's this guy talking to randos on the internet are where you have a chance to have the stage and to talk to me now I don't promise that only about half of all the randos conversations I have are appropriate for the channel and many are not published sometimes I with permission record them and save them with the person I've had the conversation and they share them privately and that's absolutely okay I'm fine with sharing them publicly as a minister I'm used to talking in public but not everything that everyone has to say is appropriate for YouTube and this particular randos conversation January 2020 was with Voth who um who is no longer with us and that was just one of the most memorable powerful conversations I've had I've had so many memorable powerful conversations with you coming into the channel sharing your story other people hearing your story the randos conversations are never the most popular videos that I have but I think they're some of the best they're some of the most precious and important and so I love them people are so amazing and I love to hear your stories um also most frustrating and I I usually have maybe two pure randos two to four pure randos conversations a week and then conversations with some other people who beg me beg me beg me to talk or they have a little podcast that they're starting and I want to sort of support them or their friends or what have you but I think a lot about when I first started doing the randos conversation I was doing a lot more of them during the week most of that was around how did you find Jordan Peterson how did you find me why is Jordan Peterson important yada yada yada that's sort of passed but the but I couldn't figure out why they were taking so much out of me and now after years of doing this I figured out why it's because when we have that little conversation and when you share your life with me and when we're doing it online like this it's it's like this little stub of a potential relationship that I know in this world will never be realized now I believe in the resurrection of the dead and what that means is I believe that these little stubs of conversations will one day perhaps in glory come to their potential and fulfillment I hope so I'll leave it to God to engineer that but when you share your life with me it's so hard for me because your life goes on and I'll never know it and I don't have time for it and of course I've got my Dunbar number number my Dunbar card quite filled at this point but I just find these little conversations to be absolutely beautiful now they're not all the same sometimes they're a little more dull than others and sometimes they're they're sort of mundane but often I'll have the experience of of just glory and and wonder in these conversations at okay now I'm going to go into Christian minister mode and what God is doing in people's lives it's just astounding so those are the randos conversations and you can find them under the playlist conversations with a z first people started sort of um kidding me about how I say conversations then I started spelling it that way and later I realized you know if I want to find them on google it's it's a good thing to do is just to slightly misspell the word so the google algorithm will will better track it to me sort of branding Rick there you go a little bit of branding Rick a lot of people are unaware that there is an audio only version of my youtube channel now the content is exactly the same except it's just the audio and I always appreciate this when youtube channels that I love have this because it's often the audio software is just a little bit more convenient than the youtube software and most of what I do with youtube is listen to stuff that's from Jordan Peterson you know listening to his stuff so you can find it on apple podcasts it looks like they only keep 100 of them at a time you can find the bigger directory of them at pod bean which is actually where these audio files are located and they go back a ways and there's tons of them there and even though the numbers on pod bean or on apple podcasts look pretty small there's about 700 000 downloads since I started doing it this way and seeing as there's about four million downloads of the channel more and more people start finding they usually find me on youtube and they sort of graduate to the audio and then if I reference something that they want to look at they go back to the youtube channel and they they find the youtube video you can also find so I monetized my channel not quite a year ago partly because google was going to start monetizing stuff anyway and if they're going to do commercials well so I tried to limit the number of ads within a video and every now and then when I forget to knock them down people say oh all the ads if you don't like ads get youtube premium I have youtube premium I never pay any attention to youtube ads other people use ad blockers and that's fine odyssey which was library mirrors all of my youtube videos and so if you want to watch my videos without commercials completely you can find them there and the link to that is also in the notes under each video but yeah there's lots of different ways to get this content and the audio podcast is is a good way and usually for kind of an average a video with sort of average hits on youtube there's about a third more that are are being downloaded on the audio only podcast now common complaints about my channel and I'm probably guilty of all of them you ramble too much absolutely don't you don't get to the point um I often don't get to the point until after I ramble a while and I discover the point and again you might say pastor all of that stuff should be happening in the study and just come to the pulpit with your conclusions uh this channel is not my pulpit I have a pulpit over on the church channel and if you're curious about what I say behind the pulpit go and find it there I do my rough drafts for sunday here and y'all are my guinea pigs I make my mistakes on you and hopefully I learn from it and improve so yeah if you know the rambling and uh that's all here and if you don't like it don't listen uh your videos are too long there's some people they're too short uh again I'm rambling I'm talking out loud I'm thinking out loud that's what I do here I'm wrong about some things I'm quite certain I am and that's what the comments are for set me straight I'm totally if you set me straight I will be straighter so differ with me argue with me that's fine you will not offend me um now if your comments disappear it's not me the only people and I think there were three of them the only people that I ever banned from the comment section in my channel I think said derogatory things about Freddy and that's it and when my channel started getting more subs because I was talking about Jordan Peterson I thought about maybe moving the Freddy and Paul show to another channel I thought maybe I'll just leave it here and see what happens now Freddy always wants me to promote the Freddy and Paul show on my normal videos so there's the advertisement uh the Freddy and Paul show is the Freddy and Paul show it's exactly what it is how to describe it I'll leave it up to you should I do it there are some days I think I should and some days I think I shouldn't but it is what it is and it's there for you to come to your own decision about so that's the Freddy and Paul show as a Christian Paul VanderKlay is too Christian not Christian enough too Protestant not Protestant enough too conservative not conservative enough too liberal not liberal enough way too open he's a hidebound dogmatist way too CRC not CRC enough again I am not offended by your take on my Christianity you can pass judgment on me all you want the only judgment that I really should concern myself with is God's judgment so and for that I have to satisfy my own conscience and lately I've done a bunch of videos about marriage equality and I'm just going to try and tell you what I'm thinking about that's what this channel is about now those who have been around here a long time know that but this is an introductory video so I'm giving you all fair warning that's what this channel is about I'm chasing fame and fortune uh if I am I'm doing it very badly the most gratifying responses I hear are thank you for your videos you're helping me sort through some stuff in my life I love if if I am doing that for you I am grateful to God and I'm I feel very gratified by that because I don't think there's a bigger compliment you can give me um you're part of why I decided to try church again that's another comment that I'm always happy to receive now if on the basis of listening to my videos you have no desire to go back to church okay I don't intend my channel to be a church substitute it isn't because we all need each other face to face so I think this is the last slide nope ended with an apology uh my channel is already too big so that I am sure to disappoint what do I mean by that um if you send me an email and I don't respond I'm sorry if you sent me a Facebook message I almost definitely did not respond because I never check it because I hate Facebook um probably an easy way to contact me is direct message me on Twitter my DMs are open um but already and I you know I look at others that started their channels about the same time I did and they're way it well up into six figures and sometimes I look at that and I think I'm doing it wrong and then I stop myself and say yeah I am that's the point of my channel maybe I'm making this video to convince myself um but in some ways my channel is already too big because for what I want from this channel well I already can't respond to all the signals you send to me and I'm sorry about that and some of you would like to have more of a pastoral relationship with me and I'm sorry about that too I can't do that with 10,000 people I can't even do that with a thousand people you can really only do that with a handful of people so I'm sorry about that my advice to you is to find a church and find a pastor if you're looking for a pastor and many of you say well I can't find one like you and well I'm sure there are certain uniquenesses about me um I'm sure there are some pastors who are better and some who are worse but it's sort of like finding a spouse you only need one now they won't be perfect and maybe they won't be all things and everything that you would imagine you need or want but they still can have a special place in your life so that's my apology and that's the hardest thing about this channel is I see people that maybe I could help and I realize I'll never have time to there are way more books way more people way more videos way more everything in this world if John in the Bible makes the comment about books how much more isn't it true of us today so find a local church or a local community to love and to be loved because it's about the most powerful and important thing you can do in this life and I guess the last thing is the last stanza of the great hymn amazing grace when we've been there 10,000 years bright shining as the sun we've no less days to sing God's praise and love each other than when we first begun and that's how I feel about this project if you don't believe in the resurrection this world should frustrate you because it is way more glory than it should have and way more pain than it should have but I hope and trust I believe in the resurrection of the dead and I believe that our Lord will reclaim for himself maximally that doesn't mean I'm a universalist which I'm not but if you find anything in this channel that is of help to you and you never get a chance to get a comment through or an email through or a dm and twitter through um on the other side come up to me and pull my cloak and say pvk I saw you on youtube you helped me you encouraged me you comforted me um you you you let me imagine that this world has more potential in it than this material universe can hold you helped me know that the author and maker of this universe is more good and more powerful and more trustworthy than anyone around here suspects and you encouraged me to look for him and to trust him and now I see with my own eyes face to face that's what makes my joy complete that's what makes my heart sing it's in the hope of that in the hope of that that I have this channel that somehow if I'm thinking thoughts that glorify God or maybe just reflect as the Psalms do in the Bible my own struggling and wrestling with doubt or with questions that somehow God can use this and do things with it that we can't imagine because our brains and our imaginations are too small so this is my channel and it's my channel and so I do with it what I want as I said I'm a selfish youtuber I don't get to the point I ramble and maybe I'll do some writing someday where in my elderly years I have points to make and I will write them down and they'll be easier to find because they'll be in text but that day really isn't yet or today so for today I do YouTube and podcasts and I talk and I share and you talk back and I want to see God's glory leave a comment