https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=z7-RaCHbwDI

 Hi, this is Paul. In case you missed it, there was a terrific conversation between Nick, who was on my channel quite a bit early on. I should probably have some more conversations with Nick, because as you can see from this conversation, he's a terrific conversation partner. I had sort of planned to not be around this Friday. My wife and I were going to take a little weekend trip, but some of those plans fell through, so I was around. But John Vervecki had very kindly volunteered to fill in for me in my usual Friday question and answer, and I knew that the Bridges Meaning Discord community would absolutely love the opportunity to ask John a bunch of questions. And so we sort of recruited Nick to be our host, and he did such a good job. I think we're going to have him do some more again, because there'll be some more weeks this summer. And we have some other special guests, many of whom you all can probably guess who they're going to be. But we'll have some more guests on the Bridges of Meaning Discord question and answer Friday sessions. Anyway, there was a question, Mathias, who is going to be on my channel coming up, I think next week. He and I have a conversation scheduled, where basically wanted some of these answers that John was able to only partially give in his conversation with Jordan Peterson to finish. And I thought one of the most interesting places was this answer. So our first one is Mathias asks, what did your girlfriend say about your relationship to Christianity that JBP cut you off before you could explain? Oh, yeah. So my girlfriend, my partner, we don't have a term for our relationship that quite suits. girlfriend sounds too juvenile. She's my partner, but because she has kids and I have kids, we don't live together. So you know, there isn't quite a she is my most significant romantic, my only and most significant romantic partner. Wow, I almost made a mistake there. And so, and so her position is basically that, sort of officially, she's an atheist, like when we started dating, that's how she self identified. And it she's a she's a tremendously deep person. That's one of the reasons I'm with her, one of the things I love about her. And she has, I think, a proper mystical, spiritual aesthetic dimension that I find deeply attractive. So but nevertheless, her sort of the position of her and her extended family is sort of one official atheism. But she, she sat me down at one point, and we were talking. And she said, I'm trying to quote this as verbatim as I can, but it's not exactly verbatim. She said, I think you're the only true Christian I've ever met. That's what she said. Interesting. Now, now, for those who don't know, john does not identify as a Christian, he identifies as a non theist. And I, it's a little weird for me to heartily recommend a video on my own channel. But I feel I can do so because I'm not in this video. And I thought this was an absolutely tremendous conversation. But let's hear a little bit more about what john's gonna say. Right. So it seems sorry, continue. I was just gonna say that. And then, Kyle, I forget Kyle's last name, he put out a video just recently, something like John Gaväki patiently asked answers every question, very humorous, hyperbole. But he he said the same thing to me. He said to me that he sees. I hesitate to say this. I'm just recording what other people have said. But he said he saw a Christ likeness in me that he thought was important. And he wanted to discuss that with me. So I had, I mean, I had person who's one of the closest people to me in my life. And then somebody who's you know, I know, Kyle, but we've only spoken once before, relatively, you know, third person, both saying this in relatively, you know, close proximity and time, and it sort of took me back. And I was trying to understand how to take that how to properly receive it, how to properly respond to it, how to understand it. So that's the answer to the question. Nice. Yeah, I would imagine that that's it probably has even a bit more. I'm not quite sure what the word I'm looking for is. It seems like it would be more bizarre hearing that comment from a non Christian than from a Christian. Yeah. Oh, I was just going to say it kind of reminds me of I think it was on Pajos channel, he was asked, right, if Christianity is the truth, why does it seem so many are untransformed by that truth? And I can't help but feel a relationship there between I don't know, perhaps this this ability to embody a belief system as opposed to to subscribe to one. And they are going to get into that a lot with the question of propositional truth. And in my commentary on the Verveky Peterson videos, we're getting into that a tremendous amount. And I actually want to do a commentary video on some of this video, because as as Rod Hare pointed out in the comments, which I pinned to the top of the comments, I don't know if I ever heard and really grasped some things out of John Verveky as clearly as I did in this video. Now, that can be for a lot of different reasons. Often, I find that it's only after I listen to something a number of times that it sort of clicks. Sometimes it's a change of context. I think part of it is Nick did such an amazing job of facilitating this conversation. I was just, you know, I was so I was here at church and Rick was running it from his little room in the back of the church and I was running cable up in the attic. I wanted to get it done in the cool of the day because it's going to be over 100 today. But I had headphones in and I was listening to this and I was just so amazed at the quality of this conversation. But there's only one piece that I really wanted to get at. I just want to make sure that they're done with this here before I stop. I've noted that comment on Pejo's channel, that question. And I agree with you. I think there is some connection to people making that attribution to me. I don't quite know what that means for me. I'm genuinely trying to stay open about that. I mean there's two things in me that a skill and peribdice that I want to sail between. One is the egocentric narcissism to say, well of course because I'm a sage on earth and people are only recognizing that kind of ridiculous hubristic crap. And then the other is no, no, no, by all means no. Don't they know how Christianity, the version that I encountered hurt me? And these two extremes would block me from being in right relationship, genuine relationship to people that are trying to tell me something. And so I'm trying to stay open to what that means and to be patient about it and neither cling on to it or throw it away but trying to say open-handed to it and see how that unfolds in my self-understanding. I'm sorry that's not a very good answer but that's that's the only answer I have right now. I think it's a great answer and I think honestly that would probably be a useful answer for many Christians themselves. But yeah it's, well okay I could probably talk to you for quite a while about this topic but I'll try and keep us moving through the questions here as we have quite a few of them. So I saw this and I've seen this in some other things as well that I want to talk about. I do try to read as many of the comments as I can in the videos that I make and I've obviously made my Jordan Peterson playlist is over 500 videos so I've made a lot of pit videos about Jordan Peterson. And it's fairly regular that I get comments like Jordan Peterson is the best Christian I've ever seen and these are people that have watched him on YouTube etc etc. And every now and then I'll get a comment he's a better Christian than you. Okay and one of my favorite comments early on is I think I had a video entitled something like is Jordan Peterson a Christian and the answer is no and neither are you. So you know this is kind of what you get in YouTube comments but this answer is this this what does it mean that people who are themselves not Christians like John's partner talking to someone who does not identify as Christian and isn't trying to identify as a Christian gets a comment like this. What does that tell us about the world? Now it certainly says some good things usually about the people that they are complimenting but what does it mean that non-Christians are using this compliment? I think what it means and this is connected again to Tom Holland's work. This is something that I just cut and pasted from my sub stack that I wrote today about eyes living eyes up and living eyes down. I think the most important work of Tom Holland in his book Dominion completely disrupts the confessionalism boundaries by demonstrating the degree to which our culture wars are really Christendom civil wars. What do I mean by that? Now this claiming to see Christ likeness in a non-Christian person by a non-Christian person is itself implicitly a pretty dramatic what's the best word to use affirmation of Jesus reputation in our culture. This you see all the time if you're a pastor because whether you've done something that people appreciate and they will compliment you that they see Christ in your action or more often than not you do something that they don't like and they basically say you're letting down Christianity by doing this. The reputation of Jesus in our culture is amazingly good. Now it's not completely good I've never been able to find it on YouTube but John Stewart once had a comment when someone was talking about Christianity and quite reasonably John Stewart sort of held up the sermon on the mount and said to his audience who are just fairly approving of Jesus even if they are not approving of Christianity or Christ's church of course Gandhi had a very famous line when he said to a Christian friend of his I like your Jesus I don't like your church. Jonathan Stewart basically said to his audience have you ever read what this man said and I think about this English professor who was teaching at Texas A&M it's an illustration that I've used Tim Keller has used it where she notes that she just gave the sermon on the mount to her students in the 1980s in the Bible Belt of Texas and most of the students gave it a negative review. So why does Jesus have such an amazing reputation? People can be um skeptical about the divinity of Christ they can be skeptical about the resurrection of the dead but for the most part Jesus has an astoundingly good reputation and the reputation is not completely uninformed the reputation is all about love and it's pretty amazing now and I think a lot of this has to say has to talk about the deep penetration of Christianity in the culture. The Rest is History has an episode there's the link to it or a shortcut to the link I'll put the link in the notes where they debate a culture war and I think Tom Holland is exactly right when first of course he begins looking at the history of the West and begin and says basically you cannot understand the West without understanding Christianity and then goes on to say most of the fights that we're having are Christian fights. I just finished recording my rough draft for the passage in the book of Acts when the church at Antioch is first established and Barnabas is sent up there to see what's going on and then Barnabas goes and looks for Saul of Tarsus to bring down there and Barnabas and Saul stay there for a year trying to disciple these new Christians who are Gentiles and don't seem to have much of any connection to the Jewish way of life. There was an enormous amount of working through that Paul and Barnabas had to do with these Christians in Antioch the first place they were called Christians and as a testimony to the success of what Paul and Barnabas did Christianity continued to grow over the next 200, 300, a thousand years throughout the Roman Empire and the world bit by bit taking over the West and along the way Jesus even though Christians have good and bad reputations the reputation of Jesus just seems to keep growing and the morality of Jesus is so deeply ingrained in our culture that you know when I listen to someone like Sam Harris his major complaint in many ways is that the church doesn't measure up to his moral yardstick yet most of the marks on his moral yardstick come from Jesus and come from Christianity as I think Tom Holland demonstrated in his book Dominion and so when John Vervecky's partner says something like this to him or people say something like this to Jordan Peterson now certainly there's a lot someone might be able to quibble about about this or that but the astounding takeaway is the dramatic impact and assumption of Christianity and Jesus in our collective imaginary and despite the ups and downs of the church that isn't going away and I tend to think that that will continue to be the seed of many different churches that will continue to grow even in this time of significant dislocation and disruption disruption by all the forces that are ongoing now after the after we taped the live stream with Nick and John I dropped into the bridges of meaning room where we usually do these for technical reasons we just streamed it instead and I also noted other comments that were also within this video and again I want to treat this video we'll see if I get around to it because there's always 10 videos that I want to treat yeah at one point John Vervecky was talking about really he's talking about Jesus in the Sermon on the Mountain saying to judge not and John I think quite real rightly said well it doesn't mean we shouldn't and I always distinguish it with the word discern you need to be discerning and John used the word don't be judgmental or judgmentalism and that led to some discussion in the live chat in going on on the side of the video and Mark LeFavor who also does not identify as a Christian you know was hearing about all these judgmental Christians and Mark LeFavor was basically like show them to me I haven't seen them now some of you I'm sure have plenty of stories that can testify to it and John has stories that can testify to it but I get this response fairly regularly too and it's usually from people who have had almost no experience in the church and one of the things that I've found quite remarkable in the development of the bridges of meaning discord server and you know it has grown to become a space in which there are a lot of Christians and we sort of have a hard time keeping atheists in stock because some of them keep becoming Christians but many of those who continue to identify as atheists and the bridges of meaning discord server will simply say I have for the most part gotten nothing but remarkably kind treatment from these Christians Ira Glass who does this American life has a story very similar to this and he noted that in the press you always see these stories of bigoted judgmental Christians and Ira Glass who's a Jew I don't know if he's an observant Jew but he's an ethnic Jew you know basically in a number of episodes have come to the defense of Christians and says I'm with Christians all the time and they're absolutely wonderful people to me now I can living in California knowing many Mormons I can you know say the same thing is true of many Mormons I've been delighted by many of the Mormons that I've known and and I'm not saying that all atheists are a certain way I've you know found many new agers and atheists and I rub shoulders with all kinds of folks here in metropolitan Sacramento and people can often be very very nice the church struggles to live up to the reputation of Jesus and I think part of the disappointment and the the hurt that people experience in church is partly because the Jesus bar is set so high and churches will almost always disappoint I've spoken recently about that I got messages from a couple of bridgers the people from the bridges of meaning who are going to be coming through Sacramento this summer and wanted to know if I'd be here and I will be here for some Sundays and gone for other Sundays and so some are happy and some are disappointed but when they come to this church I'm not always quite sure they know what to think people often say they love authenticity and I will tell them well we got authenticity at moments it can be a little cringy but it's authentic and sometimes people will come and it's often the case that people will watch me on video and they'll sort of get a vision for something and they'll come two or three Sundays and then they'll kind of drift away well why well I didn't have the same kind of experience being at Living Stones as I had watching Paul on video there's a lot of layers to that because on video you can do a whole lot of projection onto me of of things that you like and approve of and in real life the contextuality and the complexity of it will come forward and there are certainly people out there in video land that I've disappointed often because I just don't have the bandwidth to follow through with conversations and relationships in real life that sort of this facade this illusion of video presents in a way I can be close and intimate with you in a video that I can't really in real life now of course Jesus gets some wins from that because most of what we know from him we know from this book the Bible and and in some ways the church is supposed to be and you will be my witnesses um Acts 1 6 through 8 in Jerusalem Judea Samaria and to the ends of the earth and I'll often point out to people that whereas today in what's left of Christendom people look at Jesus and I think project a whole lot of really positive things onto him we shouldn't forget that in the first century almost everyone even bitter foes across the Judean culture war could agree on nothing besides killing Jesus was a good idea he was that offensive he was that confrontative at times and as you will know in a passage let's say like John 6 said something so absolutely outlandish and offensive that many who had been following him in the Galilee stopped and even turned to his his own disciples and said are y'all gonna you know check out as well and Peter speaks for them and says where else can we find the words of eternal life oh okay so the church struggles to live up to the reputation of Jesus this is a dramatic change from this first century and and even more broadly in the Roman Empire where as you know this very tantalizing quote from Suetonius that I mentioned in my sermon this week of well why did Claudius kick out the Jews from Rome in about 49 AD well because they were followed they were squabbling squabbling over this crestus figure and there's of course enormous debate were they fighting about Christ I suspect they probably were you know another issue is dogma versus dogmatism I regularly hear people who are well you know Paul has to me this Paul or the apostle Paul of Tarsus has to get rid of their dogma the Christians have to get rid of their dogma and I think in many ways the relationship between dogma and dogmatism is the same as the relationship between judgment and judgmentalism dogmatism we all need dogmas in the same way that we sort of need a frame in order to interpret the world because common combinatorial explosiveness you can hear about that in verbecky's awakening from the meaning crisis the world is too big for us to process we have to in many ways fix some things in order for us to do the relevance realization to do the relevance realization about other things in our world to actually operate that judgment and that is exactly what dogma is for dogma not only gives us a certain frame a certain fixed points by which we can evaluate and judge the rest of the world dogma also gives us some fixed points by which we can maintain a narrative thread in a community that connects us to our ancestors and helps us at least in a church do collective relevance realization with respect to the near continuous discernment that we have to do with respect to changes that come down the road many times in my series i've mentioned that a big part of the purpose of the church is sort of a drag on change this one jordan peterson moment that i have in my head that i've never really been able to find and put in the clip channel is change too much you die change too little you die you're always sort of in that moment and so that's sort of where verbecky and relevance realization which in his video about darwinian selection i found that i found i remember that from his series as a very powerful video you know really makes sense that and i love the way realization the way john uses that word really from both sides so an image of morality from jesus has completely captured the imagination of the west but whereas let's say during the cold war when there was greater alignment between the morality of western society and the church christians were known as being perhaps too moralistic and perhaps too judgmental they in fact were too prudish even though there was alignment and then one of the big changes after the end of the cold war when you see in many ways people trying to change the moral systems and christians not changing enough well why well because they're embedded in institutions and communities that are actually designed to change more slowly to be more cautious about change because as peterson said in a darwinian frame change too fast you die change don't change enough you die you have to get the degree of change right and so the church will continue and the church continues in contexts where it's thought of as being evil and bad and the church continues in context when there's more alignment and in some cases it's easier to be the church when it's a counterculture and often the church tends to win when it's a counterculture but anyway this comment about jordan peterson and john john vervecky being the best christians in the world it's always an interesting comment but i think even though you know i think it's these are meant as compliments i think it's helpful to understand the compliment compliment in the light of tom holland's work where an image of jesus has been popularized and assumed by the culture to such a degree that even if you're completely doubtful about the church and christianity for some reason you've got really positive ideas of jesus some of it might be projection you might not know all of the facts about him or data about him but it's very interesting how powerful that name is so i hope this was helpful i think i'm going to release this on saturday on monday i'll release a new commentary video on the jordan peterson vervecky talk this will be video number five heading towards that um heading towards that magic number ten where one's gonna win and have to talk to hank and sam and see what they're what they're wagering how many i'll go anyway um now i'm really itching to dig into this conversation between john vervecky and nick because what john laid out there i thought was absolutely helpful in understanding his project and i think in shedding a lot of light on i i don't want to i don't want to really do a commentary on that until i finish john vervecky's conversation with rave kelly and that came up in this video and that's another one of the videos that are on my list anyway so thanks for watching