https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_NMaLw0J3EQ

 Perhaps the most haunting and uncomfortable question that we are going to be rolling around in our minds with for the next few months will be this question, who sinned? Who sinned? Who is sinning? What sin caused the coronavirus? Is this the judgment of God? Are this particular sins of some people, political, religious, medical, making this problem worse? Are they making it better? Who sinned? Right away, predictably, when this thing hit, certain news organizations, certain pastors jumped right on this, and I guess you can count me in that group right now, is the coronavirus a judgment from God? Now Dr. Robert Jeffries, Jeffress has been, he's a pastor of a very large church in Texas, he's been an outspoken friend of this particular administration, and so right away he did a piece on it, on this question, and news organizations predictably jumped on him, and I expect that if I had posted something on Facebook, I would have seen the usual dynamics play out. Is it this the judgment of God? Is this not the judgment of God? What does, I think the better question is, what do we mean by God in that sentence? Now there are a lot of longtime answers, and actually the first thing that came up in Google, at least in my search, because I know Google adjusts searches by people, was actually Tim Keller, who had an interview on Fox News Radio, and there's a piece there, and I'll put the link below along with the other links, noted theologian and bestselling author Dr. Timothy Keller says the answer is nuanced, which is not usually what anyone wants to hear. Some Christians jump up and say, yes, this is the judgment of God, and they will tell you exactly what it's the judgment of God for, and unfortunately and ironically it will align usually with their ideas of what needs to be judged. Other Christians will jump up and say, no, it's not the judgment of God. God is nice and kind, and if God had his way this wouldn't help, this wouldn't be happening, but then that raises questions about, well then is God unable to stop this, and what are we talking about with respect to this God? Again, I recommend Tim Keller's Walking with God Through Pain and Suffering, I think it's his best book. It's written a few years ago, and I'll put the link to it down in the notes. When I visited Tim Keller in his home in 2006, I remember going up to his apartment in New York City with a group of other pastors and being asked, which now is reminiscent of what many of us are doing now, to wash our hands because his wife was struggling with some particular illnesses and her immune system was suppressed, and so we'd washed our hands and took off our feet so that we wouldn't bring our germs into the apartment, and so the kind of risk that many of us are living with now, that many of you are dealing with in terms of your own health, is something that the Kellers have lived with for a long time, and so Tim Keller's nuanced answer to, is this a judgment of God? Yes and no, and again, this has been the standard Christian answer for a very long time, and it's not an answer that many particularly like. Now the reason I raise it and ask that this question, who sinned, is because this week the lectionary churches often use a common lectionary, particularly in certain liturgical seasons of the calendar, the lectionary gospel text comes from John 9, where this particular question gets raised in a very individual manner. As he went along, he saw a blind man from birth. His disciples asked him, Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind? That simply was the expectation of the people, that someone sinned to cause this into being. Now before you get too pent up with ideas about this, note that someone born blind, let's say in India, people would have likely imagined that, well, this person had committed some sin in a previous lifetime. It's not the worldview of the Jews, but they believe that a problem from birth, a lack of shalom, a lack of what we should be able to expect of a healthy human being, was deficient. That deficiency must be, must have been caused by a moral failure. Now pay attention to Jesus' answer here, because it is actually simple, but as with many things with Jesus, very nuanced and very complex, the deeper you go with it. Jesus says, neither this man nor his parents sinned. Now pause. Are you saying this man and his parents don't sin? No, that's not what Jesus was saying. Are you saying this man and his parents never sinned? No, that's not what Jesus is saying. What Jesus is drawing attention to is our habit to draw the connection between a particular shortcoming or situation of illness or pain or tragedy with a particular sin. That is what Jesus is saying, nope, not gonna do that here, but then look at what he finally does go with. But this happened so that the works of God might be displayed in him. Oh, so he's lived his whole life blind, so he could be a sermon illustration for Jesus? Probably a lot of us would say, that's why doesn't Jesus, why doesn't God go, you do an illustration on someone else? And a point I've made in many of my pieces, the whole nation of Israel could say, why doesn't God choose someone else? Because it seems when God chooses someone for special service or special revelation or apocalyptic revelation, please choose someone else. I'd like my life or at least my expectations of my life undisturbed, please. But Jesus goes there, he does. Oh, I thought Jesus is supposed to be nice. No, Jesus is not always nice. There's a big difference between nice and good. When you go to the doctor, a good doctor will probably say things to you that are not nice if you need to hear them. Jesus is good, he can be nice, he can be kind, but he is good. It's a bigger category. So again, neither this man nor his parents send. No, you don't play that game. But yes, God is involved with his blindness. Well, what do you mean by God? Well, in the Gospel of John, there's a previous healing story, and if you want to see that story, I made a little playlist. This treatment of John 5 got cut off by the coronavirus and having to close down church, and so I'm still figuring out how to get the Sunday School class up and running. I've got a lot of ideas about how to do it. But in that passage, Jesus picks out a man who was by a pool waiting to be healed, and he had been there 38 years, and Jesus asked him, do you want to be healed? And you'd think that's a stupid question. Probably not really. And then, similar to this, Jesus kind of pops in later on the man, and Jesus found him at the temple and said to him, see, you are well again. Stop sinning or something worse may happen to you. Jesus just in chapter 9 says, well, between this man, you can't blame him or his parents, but that God's glory would be revealed through him. Here in chapter 5, Jesus says, stop sinning or something worse may happen to you. So Jesus isn't willing to disconnect sin from tragedy, but he's also not willing to connect to play this easy facile game of, oh, this particular tragedy happened to me because of this particular sin. Those are two different questions, and we have to keep those things in mind, and we're gonna see that. And connecting sin with tragedy doesn't come from nothing. In fact, if you read the Bible, you'll find it's all over the plague. Just pick up a Bible dictionary and look up plague or pestilence, and you'll get a list of places in the Old Testament where they are connected. Look at the 10 plagues against Egypt. Now, some of them are plagues or pestilence, kind of like the pandemic we're suffering today. Others were other things. There were the rats and the tumors among the Philistines that Jonathan Pujo just made a video about. There was the judgment that fell on David for the sin he committed against Bathsheba and Uriah, and that was a plague. And so, in fact, you find in the Old Testament, it's almost always assumed that plagues are part of the judgment of God sent to individuals, families, and nations. So you can't disconnect that. And again, we want to. But you also can't play the game of, well, there was just an earthquake in Salt Lake City, and the statue of the angel Moroni on top of the Mormon temple was damaged in the earthquake. Now, it would be very easy to jump on that and say, aha! Yeah, but I'm sure there are a lot of other things damaged in the earthquake. I had a picture of a fridge opening and food on the floor. Did the food fall on the floor because of a particular sin in that household? You have to be very careful with that game. But Jesus doesn't say that game is completely invalid either. And in fact, many of us might look at circumstances in our lives and draw connections between whatever you call sin. And again, my perspective is that everybody has their own definition of sin. They might not use the word, but everybody plays the game of morality. And moral judgments are like human noses. Pretty much everybody has one. And we all find deficits in each other. And when someone does something or some catastrophe falls on someone and it's connected to some moral failure, we instinctively jump forward and say, aha! Yeah, but that doesn't involve God. And again, what do we mean by God? And yes, I'm going to get into God number one and God number two in this video. Now, the common approach to this you'll find in Yuval Harari's book, Homo Deus, which is the subtraction story, which says, well, it used to believe, we used to believe that things were caused by agents and we no longer believe that. So we used to believe that plagues and pandemics and earthquake. Now, it's really interesting in Yuval Harari, he knows his Bible, he's Hebrew in background. And when he lists the sword and famine and plague, you will find that triple, that triplet, often in the Old Testament, because that triplet is common there. Now, pay attention, you might say famine, well, is famine never connected to human beings? Well, often it is. Is plague or pestilence never connected to human beings and human behavior? Well, often it is. Well, how about war? Well, always it is. So in other words, this line we like to draw between natural and unnatural calamities, that line is a lot fuzzier and an agency gets involved. Yeah, just read what Harari says, at the dawn of the third millennium, humanity wakes up stretching its limbs and rubbing its eyes. Remnants of some awful nightmare are still drifting along the mind. Well, that nightmare became a whole lot real in some places of the world. In Italy right now might be coming to the United States. There was something like barbed wire, huge mushroom clouds. Oh well, it was just a bad dream. Going to the bathroom, humanity washes its face, examines its wrinkles in the mirror, makes a cup of coffee and opens the diary. Let's see what's on the agenda today. For thousands of years, the answer to this question remained unchanged. The same three problems preoccupied the people of the 20th century China, of medieval India, of ancient Egypt. Famine, plague, and war were always at the top of the list. Why do we go to the grocery store and stockpile food? This has been built into us for a long time. For generation after generations, humans have prayed to every god, angel, and saint and have invented countless tools, institutions, and social systems, but they continued to die in their millions from starvation, epidemics, and violence. Many thinkers and prophets concluded that famine, plague, and war must be an integral part of God's cosmic plan or of our imperfect nature, and nothing sure of the end of time would free us from them. Yeah, it's a very Christian approach. Yet at the dawn of the third millennium, humanity wakes up to an amazing realization. Most people rarely think about it, but in the last few decades, we have managed to reign in famine, plague, and war. Well, apparently not as reigned in as we thought. Of course, these problems have not been completely solved, but they have been transformed from incomprehensible and uncontrollable forces. Well, right now, they're seeming pretty incomprehensible and uncontrollable. Now, a lot of this has to do with the rise of deism, and deism is a very big subject, but I'm going to reduce it quite a bit here and talk about one particular aspect of it. That, well, here's the Google definition. Belief in the existence of a supreme being, specifically of a creator who does not intervene in the universe. And right there, you have what's at the heart of deism, that there's a creator and the universe, and they're separated from each other. Now, the relationship between the creator and the universe and Christianity inherited from Judaism is very nuanced and complex, and this is illustrated by this little worldview model that I pulled off the internet from a lecture given at Mazaya College. Judeo-Christian perspective, God is transcendent and imminent, which means the relationship between God and the universe is very tight. In deism, God is transcendent. He's out there, but he's not imminent, and that's where you get, well, no interventionist, as if, see, and what that means is that the conceptualization of the universe is separate from God, and I think this is the beginning of what I often call God number one and God number two, because God number one and God number two is a separation of God's transcendence from his imminence, and so God is now out there, and then later when we get to talk with what Brett Sockold was talking about, God then, well, we'll get into what then God becomes when you imagine that, because this movement is actually a movement towards, in some ways, in some aspects, you're really differentiating what was inherent in the Christian picture that God and the universe are not synonymous, as in pantheism, that God is not exhausted by everything that's in the universe, which is pantheism, but that the relationship is, well, we're going to get into that relationship, and then of course secularism, you have the buffered self, where God is neither transcendent nor imminent, that we are buffered from God, and now you get into deism, the enlightenment, and science, well, we know that plague and pestilence are caused by germs and viruses, and it's not so mysterious, although for many of us without coronavirus tests, it feels mysterious, we have to go on the assumption that we are, in some ways, infected, but we don't know whether or not we are, because this particular illness, for some people, when they get sick with it, they almost don't even notice because it's so mild, for other people, it's deadly, well, that's really bad thing for something like this, and it's very easily caught, so we know that plague and pestilence is caused by germs and viruses, we can treat them, we can prevent them, we can test for them, we can contain them, this isn't God, but again, when you say it that way, God is like this, that's God number two, God is like this actor, no, because there's this situation that just goes in on its own, completely apart from God, and God is out there, okay, these are random events, in other words, there's no purpose behind them, well, actually random, really is not, I've made this point in many videos, random is a very fudgy word, because on one hand, we're making a metaphysical assertion with respect to it, when the word better technically is, reveals the limits of our ability to track the causes, because things that had been random before are no longer random now, the word random is really much more of a term about our limits of knowledge than necessarily patterns, well, this is not a pattern that we can use to predict particular outcomes, so we call it random, well, that's fine, I'm reading Talib's Fooled by Randomness right now, very much enjoying that book, I'm sure it'll come into my video soon, so these are random events, and when random gets fudgy, we begin to say, well, this is a religious explanation based on a religious articulation of a particular cosmology, well, it's the contemporary secular cosmology that says, well, we can't explain the Big Bang, so in other words, the old saw, you know, give me one miracle and I'll explain the rest, can't explain the Big Bang, but after that, everything unfolded via physics and randomness, there's no reason available to us, there's no purpose in the universe, it's an event in physics without, well, it had a cause, we don't know what caused the cause, but we're not going to ask that question, but there's no purpose or intentionality, things just happened, but again, this question of divining purposes or intentionality even in other people is something that we struggle with, but yet we're very sure about this assertion. Now, older documents like the Heideberg Catechism, they didn't go with that, Lord's Day 10, question and answer 27 of the Heideberg Catechism says this, what do you understand by the providence of God? The almighty and ever-present power of God, in other words, God's not separate, God's very related to the universe and we struggle with how, we're going to talk more about that, by which God upholds as with his hand, in other words, Heideberg Catechism often talks about the fact that if God were in sort of an analogy to look away from the universe, it would all disappear, that's the perspective of the Catechism, this is before Deism, remember, heaven and earth and all creatures which God upholds with his hand, heaven and earth and all creatures and so rules them, leaf and blade, rain and drought, fruitful and lean years, food and drink, health and sickness, prosperity and poverty, all things in fact come to us not by chance, see this is where it's dealing with this idea of chance but by his fatherly hand, that makes us really uncomfortable, why is it we're more emotionally comfortable with the idea of these things coming by chance than by coming by intention of a personal being who knows us personally and then when bad things come, well it's really hard not to take it personally, we're going to have to get into that and I think this is actually behind a lot of what has happened in society, so again in the secular realm we have an impersonal universe, no reason for being is available to us, it's an event of physics without cause, without purpose, without intentionality, you can't take anything personally because there's nothing personal to be taken from it because nothing personal is happening in the whole show, now this actually mirrors an ancient perspective of the universe, if you read mythology, if this is from let's say Hesiod's, in a summary of Hesiod's theogony which is the story of where gods come from, okay now we talk god capital G, god small g, are Zeus and the Lord the same thing, I was just listening to Joe Rogan, is god and Woden the same thing, no not hardly and we're going to demonstrate that here because if you read, again I've talked about this book a lot, Ezekiel Kaufman, he says Hebrews had a very different perspective from pretty much everybody else in the world that we know and we're going to talk about some of the nuance of that, in the beginning chaos, the nothingness of which the first objects of existence appeared, randomly without cause we can't say why, it's chaos and then things just appeared, arose spontaneously, the parthenogenic children of chaos were Gaia, the earth, Eros, desire or love, Tartarus, the underworld, Erebus, darkness and Nix, night and out of this then suddenly gods begin to come about, the goddess of love, the goddess of all of these things and on and on and on and this pattern you will find commonly in mythology and it's striking that that's not the pattern you find in the bible at all, read Genesis 1, it's a very different story and there's no story about what God, the Hebrew God emerged from, so pretty much in every other mythology there's some meta-divine realm out of which emerges first, like first order gods and then there'll be second order gods and we'll work our way all the way down to human beings, that's how mythology works but the gods are all part of the system, they are bound by the rules of the meta-divine realm, they are bound sometimes by the fates and see this is where, so those fates sometimes get conceptualized as gods and and so then you have the question of well are they gods within and you can see ancient people struggling with these very same questions in their system because they can't help but have these other gods that are so powerful, so are the fates gods or are they impersonal forces or laws of the meta-divine realm as we would phrase them, but the power and knowledge of the gods are all limited and so what you see is that these, in kind of ancient modern way, these gods emerge from the chaos, from the purposelessness of the meta-divine realm and then they start doing the kinds of things that gods did and some gods are better and some gods are worse, some gods are more powerful, some gods are less powerful but they're all parts of the system subject to the impersonal meta-divine realm, okay. The Hebrew story is very different, there's not a meta-divine realm, there's God and in that way God is sort of parallel to the meta-divine realm but God's not impersonal but personal and it's not subject to the rules of another thing higher than the God, it's God and creates the world out of his own desire, there's not a god, eros, out of which desire and things like you find in the Greeks, creates the world out of his own desire and for his own purposes, in other words, purpose and meaning is shot through everything in the world and again, my favorite verse for pointing to this and this nature of God is in Isaiah chapter 6, holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty, he's transcendent, he's above, he's not exhausted by creation or contained by creation but the whole earth is full of his glory, there's nothing you can't touch that doesn't have his fingerprints on it in one way or another. This is the difference between the meta-divine realm and God, we kind of see them as parallel in that, in some of the functions but they're not really parallel because God has within it far more than this impersonal meta-divine realm out of which emerges gods and things and creation and people and such. Now one thing was interesting, a few years ago I was reading Dallas Willard, he was drawing the connection in the divine conspiracy between the words of Jesus in the New Testament and Plato's Republic so picked up a copy of Plato's Republic in Greek and I'm just reading along and I begin to notice that in Plato's Republic, they'll often like the Greeks talk about the gods but every now and then you'll see this in English translations, you'll see God in all caps and this has been pointed out and not I don't think nearly looked at deeply enough which kind of shocked me from the perspective of Plato's Republic because you know Plato seemed to have this conceptualization of God which was actually common in the ancient world and also the gods and in that way well then what does Plato mean by God capital G? Well actually you see this in the Jordan Peterson conversation with Sam Harris and this is where I got my God number one and God number two because God as an idea, as a conceptualization is an incredibly useful shorthand that it seems we can't really do without. It's the sum total of what the universe delivers to us and it's sort of parallel now in post-Christian ways when people talk to universe or the universe or being or something like that okay it's something analogous to that and Jordan Peterson when he's talking to Sam Harris it's where I really saw it because it was very clear very quickly that Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris were very much talking about two different things and that's where I got God number one and God number two so God number one from Jordan Peterson is general revelation, it's immanence, it's the sum total of everything that happens to us, it's the frame of frames. Sam Harris is talking about God as agent, God as actor, special revelation, transcendence, a God in the system in some ways, a God who is written into the story. Now I got into this with my conversation with Brett Sockel on transubstantiation in the search for the substance of God because actually there's a lot of conversation about this through in medieval Christianity and in the church fathers and part of the reason that the discussion about the Lord's Supper took the kind of turn it did in the West which arrived at the Protestant Reformation was these underlying questions of the relationship of God in the universe and Brett in his book Transubstantiation nicely lays a lot of these things out in terms of why why the West has had this big fight with Protestantism and Catholicism and some of the history of that but you see this and because Jordan Peterson is talking about God as useful shorthand as conceptualization he's I'd say an open agnostic in terms of his metaphysics and his ontology with respect to this God and the agency of this God but Sam Harris uses this God number two and the reduction of it and says well now that's what we're talking about. Anybody who understands classical literature and listens to Jordan Peterson can recognize what Peterson is doing and we see this in the God of the Bible and again as as Kaufman notes there's no theogony in the Bible there's no story about how the Lord comes about the story simply starts with the Lord period and of course when you get to the New Testament you get Jesus that's going to cause a lot of turmoil and don't forget we started out with the Gospel of John here in him we live and move and have our being Paul says quoting a stoic well what does that mean that's I think about what Paul is saying here and Paul is appropriating that and saying yeah that's that's that's pointing true to a truth about God in him we live and live and have our being it's God is sort of the arena with the verveky stuff I talked about the agent really arena relationship this is God as arena this is God number one it's the ground of all being the earth is full of his glory it's it's if you ask again I've used this illustration before if you ask Frodo where's J.R.R. Tolkien Frodo has a difficult time finding Tolkien in the story of the Lord of the Rings but yet Tolkien is everywhere in the Lord of the Rings you can't understand the Lord of the Rings without Tolkien so there's an analogy that points to the relationship as such God is so imminent you can't escape him and the psalmist thought if I go to the heavens you are there if I go to the depths of Sheol you are there I mean you're there everywhere we can't get away from you but but yet the Hebrews also talk not only God as arena but also God as agent God number two God is beyond the created order and also the source of the created order holy holy holy it's as holy as you can get we can't we can't conceive of him yet we can relate to him through analogies God is not exhausted by the material order or the physical order of the order that we see God is also agent God is both agent and arena now I used an imperfect analogy in a conversation with with Nathan on his live stream he he told me they had gotten the virus and and you know I'd met Nathan and done a conversation with him before and wanted to sort of check up on him so I popped into his stream and everybody wanted to talk about Calvinism well and so I gave some analogies of the game designer designing the game when I was watching my children play Uncharted I'm not real good at these kind of computer games because I didn't grow up using those controllers but I'm watching them navigate I've tried it and I'm a mess but I watched them navigate and I very quickly learned that well you it looks like you can go everywhere and do everything but you really can't the game designers have sort of set you on a track and and you you have tremendous amount of freedom in there but but the players have the players have the agency of the players is dependent upon the agency and the freedom of the designer and and the default the designer has consistency and coherency with respect to what he does with that but he's also working a narrative for example if if JRR Tolkien would give Aragorn an f-15 it would break the story now does that mean well okay let's think of JRR Tolkien in World War II let's have him give him a British Spitfire if you know Aragon would come flying in in a British Spitfire it would break the story could Tolkien write Aragorn in a World War II Spitfire into the Lord of the Rings wasting orcs sure but it would break the story so the agency of the players is a sub-agency beneath and this is where the question of God and this is where this this stuff gets complicated the player has contingent freedom but the game designer has greater greater freedom and they're connected yet they're distinct it's an imperfect analogy but I think it highlights some things and and this I think can add to and help inform the complexity of the way Jesus talks did this man or his parents sin no does it mean they're without sin no it's not what he's saying he's saying you can't draw these lines you don't have that kind of knowledge but yet at the same time he warns the guy in John 5 stop sinning or something worse might happen to you so there is a connection yeah there is a connection can you draw the connection maybe not well can you always draw the connection no can you sometimes draw the connection yeah always and sometimes are not necessarily enemies but you have to understand them both our agency is not in competition with gods and this is exactly what you will find in historic Christianity that we can in some ways say yeah this COVID-19 is part of the judgment of God yes and no God isn't out of the picture God isn't a weak character like Zeus or Apollo or another God trying to battle with the fates no that's not the picture of God at all in Christianity it's a totally separate picture let's read the story because it's a great story John 9 as he went along he saw blind a man blind a man blind from birth his disciples asked him rabbi who sinned this man or his parents that he was born blind neither this man nor his parents sin said Jesus but this happened so that the works of God might be displayed in him as long as it is day we must do the works of him who sent me night is coming when no one can when no one can work while I am in the world I am the light of the world now think about that metaphor night is coming but while I'm in the world I am the light of the world now as always with these passages you can any verse and spend hours with them but for the sake of time I'm not going to do that because even reading and interpreting a text is selecting within the text after saying this he spit on the ground made some mud with the saliva and put it on the man's eyes go he told them wash in the pool of salam now this kind of thing often gets attention from people because it's why did Jesus do it this way why is that magic well Jesus had his reasons for doing it this way I think there were communication reasons for why Jesus did it this way but we see many times when Jesus doesn't hardly say anything it just announces that and you saw this in John chapter four that the royal official's son miles away was healed when Jesus simply declared him healed so Jesus is not limited to this kind of thing but Jesus sometimes does this kind of thing and if you think through what I'm trying to say about God and God's relationship with the world it makes sense it makes similar sense to C.S. Lewis's observation about Jesus turning water to wine C.S. Lewis makes the observation that God turns water to wine every day Jesus just sped it up in some ways Jesus did it indirectly but this is how Jesus and God C.S. Lewis in his book miracles will talk about miracles of the old creation miracles of the new creation that this there's not a break in the created order as deism imagined when Jesus does this he told him go wash in the pool of salam this word means scent so the man went and washed and came home seeing now if you notice the way Jesus sets this up and this might be the reason for you know using the mud and all of this communicating to the man the man doesn't know what Jesus looks like and Jesus the man doesn't regain his sight when he's in the presence of Jesus and you'll find Jesus often using these things for the impact he wants and if you go and you look at my Sunday school class you'll see that Jesus is carrying on a very intentional way of communicating himself to the world that has not stopped or been exhausted in the first century his neighbors and those who had formerly seen him begging asked isn't this the same man who used to sit and beg some claimed that he was others said no he only looks like him there's a running question in these stories about who really is blind for whom is the light on and who is walking around in darkness and you might remember a couple of weeks ago Nicodemus comes at night the woman at the well comes in midday the gospel of john plays with these things some claims that he um others say no he only looks like him but that but he himself insisted hey ask me i'm the same guy how then were your eyes opened because this doesn't happen he replied the man they called jesus made some mud and put it on my eyes he told me to go to salome and wash so i went and washed and and i could see just the facts where is this man they asked i don't know didn't you listen to the story i had to get my way to the pool and i washed and he's not here so i don't know where he is they brought to the Pharisees the man who had been blind bring to the leaders everybody knows it's a miracle nobody can cover this thing up it's already out even if people want to cover it up which is where we'll go to now the day on which jesus had made the mud and opened the man's eyes was the sabbath another layer again see my jesus keeps doing this on the sabbath to provoke incidences around himself jesus could have done this another day of the week the guy's always been begging there for years jesus picks the fight on the sabbath intentionally and again go see excuse me my sunday school lessons about this therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight he put mud on my eyes the man replied and i washed and now i see same story shorter version i keep having to tell people the same story now some of the Pharisees said this man is not from god now if you remember nick adidas nick adidas thought he was and so right there you see that the the political religious leaders are divided on jesus jesus has caused a division amongst them this man is not from god for he does not keep the sabbath oh he didn't keep the sabbath he did heal the man now we have dissonance we have a theological crisis and we don't know how to resolve it so we're going to talk about it with each other others said how can he perform things like this if he's a sinner so they were divided because again if you look at the difference between the meta divine realm and god sin is rebellion against god and so sinners shouldn't be able to do miracles and they're trying to figure this out assumptions of the world of what you know assumption of the world was that god's will is made known by its outcomes and that's what they're struggling with and so this question about sinners and gods now this is a very old conversation and if you read tom holland's the shadow of the sword or if you read the book of job you'll see that for thousands of years people have been working on these questions because well if god is this useful heuristic for everything that comes our way sort of like we use universe or or what have you when we personify it therefore it's easy math to read god's mind if this thing happened then god is down with it so god was pro holocaust or god was pro disease or god is pro this and this is lurks behind this question of is the coven 19 virus the judgment of god well if it's here now it must be god's will but this question about god's will is a really complicated thing and already the book of job which is a very ancient book the point of the book of job is that don't fall for the easy math but what you'll find is that we keep falling for it we fall for it in the church we fall for it outside the church pagans fall for it everybody falls for the easy math you can't and the point of the book of job and jesus point is you can't read god's mind just by looking at outcomes they're also making a similar point outcomes also express god's mind now if you think about how human beings relate it's similar ask somebody why did you do that they probably can't tell you or think of the rider and the elephant they'll give you a reason for it in fact when they do these split brain things one side of the brain does one thing and the other side of the brain makes up a story okay is the story disconnected yes and no so in other words give up the easy math business about god and outcomes jesus is saying no the book of jobes said no but you can't always give up that and so in other words be very careful with it and when you do these kinds of judgments you might be held called to account for these kinds of judgments let's get back to the story then they turned again to the blind man what have you to say about him is it um it was yours that eyes that were open so okay what are we to think about jesus we can't agree so we asked this man well what does he think about jesus the man replied he's a prophet well that's a very reasonable answer because in order to sort of fit jesus into the categories well prophets are the ones who are special revelations from god in alignment with god and sometimes able to do miraculous things like elijah and elijah so he's a prophet like elijah or elijah okay it's a reasonable answer he's been to sunday school but it's not the answer the politicians want they still did not believe that he had been that he had been blind even though all of the evidence says he was and had received his sight until they sent for his parents well we need facts here don't think ancient people didn't understand blindness and facts and all the kinds of data we did they understood it quite well so okay you say you were born blind well all these other people in the streets saw him every day we're gonna talk find his parents so to haul the parents in is this your son they asked is this the one you say was born blind how is it that he can see now get the parents to tell us maybe they'll resolve the situation with data and with facts and with reason and with science we know he's our son the parents answered and we know he was born blind but how he can see now or who opened his eyes we don't know we weren't there ask him he's of age he'll speak for himself parents understand the political scene too and it's like get us out of this room his parents said this because they were afraid of the Jewish leaders who already had decided that anyone who acknowledged that jesus was the messiah would be put out of the synagogue they're having a culture war a lot of people talk about our culture war today as being really something well it was a lot worse in the first century and everybody understood that you don't want to be a person making political statements or religious statements of certain kind or you're going to get in trouble and you're going to be ostracized by your community there's nothing new under the sun human beings play these games all the time that was why his parents said he's of age ask him so depending on the answers you give well this guy likes Trump so all of his answers are wrong well this guy politics is now religion is always we love to divide on these and it clouds our thinking I can't listen to anybody who voted for Trump I can't listen to someone who says anything against Trump this is what we do all the time it makes no sense I'm a scientist well then you don't say the word Donald Trump because it'll be a mess a second time they summoned the man who had been blind give glory to God by telling the truth oh okay they said we know that this man is a sinner oh in other words you're going to close your eyes to the evidence he replied whether he's a sinner or not actually this blind guy he's really down whether he's a sinner or not I don't know one thing I do know I was blind but now I see get used to it people you're not going to get beyond the facts then they asked him what did he do to you how did he open your eyes he answered I have already told you and you didn't listen why didn't you listen because I came to this with my preconceived notions of how it is is this the judgment of God who sinned yes it's the judgment of God against whatever your list of political enemies is no it's not the judgment of God because God is this kind nice wallflower and only gives pink unicorns and fairy dust to anyone who's out there we're front loading our assumptions and trying to make the facts fit we always sort of do that but it's a very dangerous thing and he says to him I already told you and you didn't listen why do you want to hear it again now he's sarcastic they're not going to like that do you want to become his disciple too I love this guy they hurled insults at him and said you are this fellow's disciple we are disciples of Moses we know that God spoke to Moses but as for this fellow we don't even know where he comes from go back to John 3 what does Nicodemus say he comes from heaven what does Jesus say born from above this is what the gospel of John is trying to argue for we don't even know where he comes from the man answered now that is remarkable you don't know where he comes from yet he opened my eyes we know that God doesn't listen to sinners he listens to the godly people who do his will nobody has ever heard the heard of opening the eyes of a man born blind if this man were not from God he could do nothing this guy is using reason and logic to this they replied you are steeped in sin at birth karma how dare you lecture us and they threw him out Jesus heard that they had thrown him out and so he found him and he said do you believe in the son of man now again this is such classic Jesus Jesus doesn't even to this guy you would think Jesus is going to schmooze him or just be cozy with him or Jesus throws a question at him that that that he just healed him but Jesus is still challenging him even such do you believe in the son of man it's like where does this come from it comes from Daniel 7 Daniel 7 in fact has this great scene where Daniel is first six chapters of Daniel are all are all ordeal based things and I've talked about this before and I have a video on this actually on the church channel all these ordeal based things about you know the will of God can be seen through outcomes that's like the first six chapters it's not thrown away but then in chapter 7 Daniel is disturbed and we kind of get the second half of the story and there's the scene of these sea monsters coming up out of the sea out of the chaos they're emerging just like the gods of the ancient world and they're crunching up the kingdoms of the world and these these sea monsters are empires it's like out of something like pacific rim and then the ancient of day shows up and there's no battle scene it's just boom done you'll see this in the book of revelation boom done it's like Jesus saying your son is healed that fast the sea monsters are are subdued the ancient of danes takes his seat his hair is white as snow his um his clothing is white as snow is the hair of his head is white like wool his throne um was blaze was flaming with fire and its wheels were all ablaze a river of fire was flowing coming out from before him thousands upon thousands attended him 10 000 times 10 000 stood before him the courts were open and the books were seated then i continued to watch because of the boastful words that the horn was speaking the ancient of days kind of cuts them down but doesn't really snuff them out it's still speaking the ancient of days is patient he listens and and this is a this is a sign again of god's immense humility forbearance and patience that all the stuff that he doesn't agree with and doesn't approve of he lets it go we criticize god for that but the message of the bible is always only for a time i kept looking until the beast was slain and its body destroyed and thrown into the blazing fire the other beasts had been stripped of their authority and they were allowed to live a period of time in my vision i looked and there before me was one like a son of man coming with the clouds of heaven he approached the ancient days as was led into his presence he was given authority glory and sovereign power all nations and peoples of every language worshiped him his dominion is an everlasting dominion that will never pass away and his kingdom is one which will never be destroyed do you believe in the son of man boy that's a loaded question tell me so that i may believe in him jesus said you have seen him look at what jesus claims here jesus claims i am that man in daniel seven now the romans when they hear son of man they don't understand a lot of people today when they hear son of man well he's a human being yeah he's a human being but that's why the editors have capital s capital m because jesus is taking this passage and saying if you want to understand me here i am you have seen him you couldn't see before this is the one that gave you your sight in fact he is the one speaking to you then the man said lord i believe and he worshiped him jews aren't supposed to do that and this is why jesus is god the arena can he also be an agent within the arena can the agent within the arena have the power of the arena even being the agent agent that's what christianity says that's why these questions are complex and nuanced and jesus says these things for judgment i have come into this world so that the blind will see and those who see will become blind what's jesus saying some pharisees who heard him say this asked what are we blind too jesus said if you were blind you would not be guilty of sin jesus twists it again but now that you claim you can see your guilt remains so right there all these assumptions we have that you can't be guilty of something that you do in ignorance yet jesus says yeah that's true that he comes in judgment now again if you had read in previous chapters in the book of john you'll notice in chapter 3 17 he says i didn't come the son for god did not send his son into the world to condemn the world that the world might be saved but that the world might be saved through him and in 12 17 i did not come to condemn the world but to save the world but yet in 9 38 he says i came into the world for judgment to condemn same greek word the father has turned all judgment to to the son so so which is it this is from the commentary from raymond brown if you're looking for a commentary on the gospel of john it's a classic we believe that the translation of crinan as condemn in these passages also in 8 26 is a clear justification in contrast with save nevertheless the statement that jesus did not come to condemn does not exclude the very real judgment that jesus provokes what does that mean in the immediate context of the above statements we are told that he who refuses to believe in jesus condemns himself while he who believes escapes condemnation the idea in john then seems to be that during his ministry jesus is no apocalyptic judge like the one expected at the end of time yet his presence does cause men to judge themselves a little bit before raymond james said or raymond brown said we believe that the translation crinan to condemn in these passages is clearly justified with contrast was saved but nevertheless the statement that jesus did not come to condemn does not exclude the very judgment that jesus provokes in the immediate context of the above statements we are told that he who believes that he who refuses to believe condemns himself while he who believes escapes condemnation the idea in john then seems to be that during his i read this this is a bad slide i'm gonna have to make sure this doesn't get into the rough draft now follow the pandemic our sin and glory revealed by the pandemic trip just posted this on twitter he said don't forget police in central china january 1 arrested eight people spreading rumors about a local outbreak of an undead unidentified an unidentifiable pneumonia previous online post we're calling it sars are sins being revealed is glory being revealed yeah all the time and we're gonna watch this through the whole thing there's gonna be sin we're gonna be condemned our actions are going to be condemned our sins are going to be obvious glory is going to be revealed some people are going to do glorious sacrificial things in this pandemic and we can't stop playing politics we can't stop with condemnations but again it's very interesting because mother jones attacked this particular pastor for what he wrote about this is this judgment of god yeah he said it's basically it's like the judgment we see in the book of revelation yeah it's not a i probably wouldn't have phrased it this way but it's not a crazy thing so then mother jones finds a theologian more to their liking and he says this the problem i have with fundamental evangelicalism is that they put a circle a thick line around the scriptures instead of a dotted line oh okay you're talking about the bible but then what he proceeds to say is something i could agree with as well faith is the capacity to live with complexity and uneasy questions absolutely he says when you go when you go too quickly to punishment you forego too quickly on the grace of god absolutely but again it's both and it's is this the judgment of god yeah yes and no can like jesus says at the beginning you draw an easy line was it his thought what is his his sin or his parents no neither but that the glory of god would be revealed so god is involved in this we're involved with questions of is this god's did god cause this or did god permit this and this was where sort of you get into this first and second order causality now when we get into the question of the nuns is this something god should have avoided god should intervene again we're putting in deist language and in some ways god in the system is this that that god like apollo or zeus will come in and stop things well governments and principalities are leaning into reduce things and that's all good and we should want that um nuns and impersonal god well this this is part of a problem for that group too well everything happens for a reason okay what's the reason for this well we don't know the reason okay somehow you're comfortable saying that but saying i don't know the reason god would have this done you're uncomfortable saying that yeah because again we're back into this this taking things personal space that if it happens for randomness and again randomness is sort of this idea that no one can track it so then it's an accident it's impersonal to not take it personally we feel better about that in terms of our interpersonal relationships is your impersonal meta divine realm ancient or modern better is it really better if it happens accidentally or on purpose well it's because i'm nervous about my relationship with the almighty why do you feel better when it's up to me what does that reveal remember apocalypse and revelation is the same word and eric weinstein i don't mean this in any way as a slight against him because what he managed to do in that sentence was articulate what i've been seeing others expressing but i couldn't put it such into a nice sentence if god is a person and not an impersonal meta divine realm ancient or modern eric's opinion is it's better if there is no god because if there is a god you have to worry about what's on his mind i would rather have power of my own agency and not have to worry about well you still have to worry well you still have to worry about all the other powers in the world and randomness as you imagine it to be but jesus is no coward and he's not afraid of nuance but nor does he have patience for the easy math approach yep this happened because of this do you know that maybe if i had a car accident and i was injured because i didn't wear a seat belt well maybe the sin of not wearing a seat belt i can draw that line it doesn't explain the car accident we human beings are small and even when we use the word random we're basically saying even though we don't fess up to it that which is beyond my ability to comprehend or predict but it's not necessarily unpredictable i just can't do it or maybe we can't do it but that doesn't mean it's chaotic those are all our judgments we bring to it like the poor will always have judgments with us we'll do it to job we'll do it across the aisle politically the truth is we're very limited in what we can know and maybe we should acknowledge that and what's at the heart of this are our trust issues because we're so funny on this score on one hand we have a need to trust scientists or or those in authority or do the scientists really have your best interest at heart look at the trolley car experiment what if you know you're part of the one or part of the five is that really going to help you see we grab onto these things now christians say well there is one who is good who is in charge and then the pandemic comes and our trust issues are tricky the nasty truth we're desperately trying to avoid is we are fragile we are vulnerable we are limited not our power not our knowledge can secure for us what we want and expect for ourselves we are dependent creatures and whether that's dependent upon an impersonal meta divine realm dependent upon politics dependent upon a virus none of us get out of this world alive and we like to fabricate things that imagine we are in control and we are not we have trust issues that's what's at the heart of our pastoral problems this commenter who made i don't know if it's a his or her you can never tell with with with comments volvo denia left a comment on the church channel after last week's sermon um it's been watching my videos for a while i recognize the comment names i don't have so many users that i can't recognize unis but then you know cheers probably a um a brit or someone has already had the caught the coronavirus i always feel like pastor paul has to match the tone of a chronically ill person well the old saying is if you're a pastor if you preach to the suffering if you preach to the suffering you'll never lack for an audience as a personal question to the pastor what is it that god is doing that you are not okay with i'm not okay with the coronavirus i want it to go away now maybe maybe i'm subject to all of the panic that's going around and maybe it's overblown and maybe a month from now i'll say i was such a dupe i made all those videos i'll keep them up go ahead call me a dupe i'm fine with it i will so happily a month from now or two months from now when all of the members of living stones church come out of the other side of this alive i will be thrilled but if the coronavirus takes the life of one person that i personally know and love yes i won't be happy with it is god involved yes i look at the death of my sister a little over a year ago look at the death of my father can look at things in my life what really bothers me are the things that i know i'm responsible for and the sufferings that they've caused but yeah trust issues with god you think i don't have them i'm just like the rest of you i've got him too which is why i'm religious because what religion is doing is training me training me to love one another training me in the school of jesus training me to be his disciple training me to believe and me to trust from a young age i learned the first question and answer of the heideberg catechism is one of the most beautiful things i know you can find christian reform people all around the united states and canada with this on their walls my father is a big one in his study and when it's time to break up mom's house i'm going to take that plaque and this is what it says and if you believe it you can say it with me it's something that's worth devoting to memory what is your only comfort in life and in death that i am not my own in him we live and move and have our being that i'm not my own but belong body and soul and life and in death to my faithful savior jesus christ he has fully paid for all my sins i don't have to go to the grave worrying about my sins is fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood and has set me free from the tyranny of the devil the devil can lay no claim on my soul he also watches over me in such a way that not a hair can fall from my head do hairs fall randomly a lot of hairs have fallen without the will of my father in heaven yeah we're talking about the same thing in fact all things must work together for my salvation salvation of what salvation of everything now and in the age to come because i belong to him christ by his holy spirit assures me of eternal life i don't always believe i've got my own trust issues i have anxiety i'm worried i'm scared all that stuff happens to me too it makes me wholeheartedly willing and ready from now on to live for him that's pretty aspirational some days i want to read it again through all the way without my little editorial comments what is your only comfort in death that i am not my own but body but belong body and soul in life and in death to my faithful savior jesus christ he has fully paid for all my sins with his precious he has fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood and has set me free from the tyranny of the devil he also watches over me in such a way that not a hair can fall from my head without the will of my father in heaven in fact all things must work together for my salvation because i belong to him christ by his holy spirit assures me of eternal life and makes me wholeheartedly willing and ready from now on to live for him virus or no virus cancer or no cancer health or bad health fat years and lean years in the united states we've had some fat years now we may be in for some lean years what does the other lord's day say i don't have that one memorized almost the almighty and ever-present power of god by which god upholds us with his hand heaven and earth and all creatures and so rules them leaf and blade rain and drought fruitful and lean years food and drink health and sickness prosperity and poverty all things in fact come to us not by chance but by his fatherly hand i should pull up the next question and answer how does this knowledge of god's creation and providence help us we can be patient when things go against us thankful when things go well and for the future we can have good confidence that our faithful god and father good confidence that our faithful god and father that nothing in creation will separate us from his love for all creatures are so completely in his hand that without his will they can neither move nor be moved that's where we are that's the hope and confidence we have that's why i'm religious to deal with my trust issues