https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ddxnyuZD-BA

 Hi, this is Paul. Winter has arrived in Sacramento and my bald head is cold, so I'm gonna wear my hat. Hope nobody is offended. Yesterday, Bridges of Meaning Discord server, we've been doing watch parties lately and if I get a chance to, you know, have to do some administrative work in my office or sometimes, sometimes I'll just open up Bridges of Meaning and start streaming a video. Ferdy was streaming the conversation between Tom Holland and Jonathan Peugeot. Really fascinating conversation. My only problem with it, it's too short. They need to go longer. But then afterwards, we streamed Jonathan Peugeot's conversation with Carl Benjamin. That was fascinating. Now, Tom Holland has been on a trajectory for a while now and so his book Dominion in some ways was his exploration of the challenge After he had written in the Shadow of the Sword about the roots of Islam, Tom writing as a professional historian, the person basically challenging him, you know, find, you know, demythologize the story of your religion and Tom Holland having to answer the question, well, what is my religion? I thought I was an atheist. I thought I was just a regular person without a religious overlay. And then of course, Tom Holland writes Dominion and discovers, no, we're all constructed. We all have a story. All of our ideas come from somewhere. You don't have religious people over here and non-religious people over there. Again, that's sort of religion S versus religion W as a worldview. All of our belief systems we inherit, they're constructed. And what we've been seeing in the IDW space, which, politically is very interesting, is sort of where Carl Benjamin is at and people who went through the celebrity atheist shtick 10 or 15 years ago now coming out the other end and saying, well, maybe I don't believe there is a God, you know, imagining God to be some super thing up in the sky, but I can sure see how religion functions and the way that it shaped our society and its necessity. And that's really where Jonathan Peugeot's conversation went with Carl Benjamin. It was very interesting. And of course, now, I thought these two conversations, similar to when John Verveke and Jonathan Peugeot did a conversation on rebel wisdom not too long ago, Jonathan made the comment that John Verveke had sort of gotten his piece into rather a nice piece with a handle on it. John could pretty much lay out his mission quite clearly. And I thought Jonathan Peugeot laid out in shorter segments some of what's going on behind his symbolic world. And so I think both now the video with Carl Benjamin that's currently on ThinkSpot, it's not on YouTube. So you might have to go on to ThinkSpot and search for it. And I don't know if it's free or behind a paywall or what. I got a ThinkSpot account very early on. I don't know. I don't go there very much because I mostly get my stuff from YouTube. But anyway, so hopefully it'll come to YouTube very, very much worthwhile watching. I won't do any clips from it just because I don't want to impose on anybody's copyright. And YouTube sort of has its own system for dealing with that. But now, and then this morning, just a lot of chitter chatter on Twitter. Tom Holland's quite active on Twitter. Norman Shields writes, it's incredible to see Tom take the same themes Jordan Peterson discussed and talk about them in a similar manner, even though Tom has never heard of Peterson. Would love to see them chat at some point. Now, what's interesting is that, so then Tom Holland writes, just out of curiosity, what are the themes we have in common? And that's a really fair question because if you're listening to Jordan Peterson and Tom Holland, you might very well think they're talking about two totally different things. Jordan Peterson is doing sort of this strange thing about the Bible and monkeys and wolves and, and, and pink sap and young and Dostoevsky and all of that. And Tom Holland doesn't seem to be doing that. And so I answered overlapping in terms of outcomes. And this is where Carl Benjamin's Sargon of Akkad comes in. You are all saying the blessings of Western civilization can't be preserved without recognizing and somehow reconnecting to its source. Sargon of Akkad and, and Jonathan Pigeot were making the same noises. And so then Norman writes back, well, actually, from a personal perspective, they both had a radical impact on my life and they seemingly entered my life just at a time when my Christian faith had almost vanished. So I have a lot to thank them for. And, and so even though Tom Holland has come at this from a very different perspective than Jordan Peterson, Tom Holland has had a similar result to what he's done. And I think, and so, okay, so let's take the Venn diagram and then Jonathan Pigeot, throw him into the mix and say, why are these conversations reinvigorating people who are deconstructing or their Christianity is lapsing? Why would Tom Holland's impact, why would Tom Holland have that impact? Now, I get into a lot of this in the video I made a little while ago. Belief in God is not the key difference between Christians and atheists. I know that sounds slightly heretical, but everything I'm doing since then really leads me to believe it, that what's going on is not in any way as direct as modernity and especially this new atheism imagines it to be, or even many rationalist, modernist Christians always imagine, well, we sort of believe because we line up these blocks. Now, again, all the, all the brain science says, and especially the, the Ian McGilchrist stuff, that, well, the master and his emissary, well, the, the side of our brain that is processing intuitively, taking in large amounts of information and just sort of dealing with it in terms of pattern recognition and all of this stuff that we're sort of feeling and we're doing, that's one side of our brain. And the other side of the brain is like, okay, well, let's get it down into rational chunks and to, and to discrete things, things we can grasp, things we can get our hands around. And, and that seems to be the way our brain is processing. Now, rationalists, celebrity atheists like to imagine, well, let's, let's just get all that stuff, let's just get all that stuff down in writing into syllogisms and nice little concrete things. And if we can reduce life to all of these little boxes, all of these little objects, all of these little discrete terms that have one-to-one relationships with things out into the world, this is again, Jordan Peterson's world of objects, if we can reduce life into that, then we'll somehow be able to manage it and, and, and, and set the world right. And, and if anything, no. And cognitive science has basically said no, because the world is too big. You, you do not have enough time in your little life to manage the world that way. It will never happen. You'll never be able to get it done. Now, along comes the question about church, what is the reason behind the reason for church? What does church do? Because again, when I, the more I talk to a variety of people, many of the reasons they don't want to, well, there's a lot of reasons that they don't want to go to church. And that was some of the most interesting stuff between Jonathan Pigeot and, and, and Carl Benjamin. But people think know why, people think they know why they or others go to church. And I would assert that it's probably, we're mysteries to ourselves. We're not transparent to ourselves. We're not anywhere near as in control of ourselves. And as we would like to imagine, in my experience as a pastor, this is not the case. If you don't feel a reason to go, you won't, but we are not transparent to ourselves. And you can even see the apostle Paul not deal with it so much in terms of church going, but deal with it in terms of the good that I would do, I don't do. And the evil that I don't want to do, I do. And that's a pretty much universal human experience. We are not as direct or as rational as modernity likes to imagine we are. So many of the reasons why people do or don't go to church are just so pedestrian and ordinary. They go to church because they're in the habit of it. They want to see their friends. They get a little up boost there. They want to improve their relationship with God. They're afraid of God's judgment. They want to make business contacts. They want to meet girls. They want to meet guys. You know, they want to send their kids there and their kids are guilting them to go. They have a relationship with God. They don't have a relationship with, I mean, just on and on and on and on and on and on. It's a very human thing. But again, in my experience, it's never quite so direct because people will say, oh, I really want to go pastor. And then they don't show up. And then people just drag themselves in. And this is part of the deal with COVID because people are now getting out of the habit of going to church. And those habits are a pretty big deal. Now I'm going to summarize this. I've been talking, when I talked about my father, I talked to Chris Arnotti about taking pictures. Here's one of these pictures from Northside Chapel growing up. So for me, this was church for me growing up. And that's my father behind the pulpit before all his hair was gray. He didn't go as bald as I did. But this was, me as a boy, this is what church looked like. And I usually sat right in that. I think I can see one of my sisters down here. And you can't see my finger. One of my sisters down there, we always sat in the back row because my mother would, I was not a very well-behaved child in church. And my mother kept me by the door just in case she had to take me out and discipline me with some corporal punishment. So no hard feelings, mom. I survived. But this was church growing up. And I think there's basically three groups of reasons why people go to church. It's good for me. It's good for this world. And it's vital for my participation in the end, in the age to come, meaning something in afterlife. And so I want to talk about those three reasons and pulling some resources about that. Now I think a big part of what we see going on with the IDW is we need to save Western civilization. As Carl Benjamin, as Jordan Peterson made very clear, in many ways, part of the reason everybody wants to get into the English-speaking countries is as Carl Benjamin said. I think he's exactly right. At least over the last 50 or 100 years, these countries have been good places to live. And for all of the hand-wringing and talk about all kinds of ways in which these countries may have not been good places to live if you were black or a Jew or some other group, generally speaking, they've been better places to live than other places in the world. And the easiest way to see this is just look where people are trying to get into and countries people are trying to get out of. And that's not an exact science, but it's a fairly good indicator. And so what the sense of all of these men, and really the IDW in some ways, is well let's at least not lose some of what we've enjoyed for the last 75 years. We need to save Western civilization and it has connected somehow to the Bible. And we're not exactly sure, but we somehow have the feeling that if all of this religion stuff goes away, well maybe we're going to be in big trouble. And if you go back and look at my conversation with Ryan Bennett. Now again, Ryan Bennett is not a Christian, but he's been watching these conversations. And he says, you know, we talked about there's sort of a herd immunity argument that what happens when a certain portion of your population no longer... that's where the definitions get difficult because you'll find people who are God-believers or God-fearers and are terrible citizens and others who are not. They believe in God, they go to church, they're honest, they pay their taxes, they don't cheat on their wives, they're good to their children. You know, in Latin America we talked, we saw a lot of what had happened with evangelicals in Latin America. And now, you know, Latin America is mostly Catholic, but part of what happened with sort of these evangelical revivals that you would see was that somehow some other ideas had gotten into Christianity in Latin America where men would be cheating on their wives and they would be spending their money at bars or gambling or something else. And once the man of the family would become evangelical, he would start being faithful to his wife and his assets would start being used for the welfare of his wife and their children. And what happened once you got a certain level of the population that was now acting that way is you'd see an uplift in the whole society. You would see less corruption, you would see more people contributing to the family. Now, now in all fairness, again, the experience of Roman Catholicism in North America was very different from the experience of Roman Catholicism in a lot of Latin America. And again, not always. There were very good Catholic families who were, but again, and so getting, figuring out where the religion and the culture and where all these lines are is not always very easy. But, you know, Ryan and I were talking to some degree about, you know, sort of a herd immunity idea that once a certain percentage of the country is invested religiously in certain ways, you're going to have less cheating on wives, more taking care of children, less public corruption, more being faithful to your word, more following through with your commitments. And this is what we all want from our neighbors. We want our neighbors to, you know, we don't mind when our neighbors are churchgoers, when they, you know, vaccinate their children, when they pay their taxes, so on and so forth. The church seems important to some people to get it. And you find this all the time. It's often the case, at least has been traditionally in the United States, that people's life would get out of whack. And I see this often in poor communities. Young men would get in trouble. They'd get in trouble with drugs and alcohol. They'd be listless. And then going to church is not always a thing, but is often a thing where, okay, they're getting their life together. They're going to church with the family. And in many ways, a lot of this has to do with men, getting men to commit. And again, a lot of this stuff falls right in through the Jordan Peterson stuff. The church is important for some people to get it. But now, that would sort of be what Sargon of Akkad kept saying. Well, we, this is, maybe some people need church in order to get classical liberalism. And at one point in the Discord server, I said, you know, he had just made a comment, said, well, there's this religion. It's right there. It's that, it's that people live out a certain script and live a certain way. And many of these people are now recognizing that, well, a lot of this stuff has come to us through the history of religiosity. And this is clear in this book that I talked about a number of videos ago, David Holmes book, Faith's Plural of Our Founding Fathers, where you had Washington and Franklin who, Washington was never a confirmed Christian. Washington sort of avoided taking communion, but, you know, Washington was generally supportive of religion and society. And this is where you, and Franklin the same way. Now they were deists, but Benjamin Franklin loved going to listen to George Whitefield preach, that would give his money and talk about it. They don't want to take too much money when he lifts the Whitefield because he'd give all the money into the collection plate. And Franklin was a very interesting guy. Jefferson, of course, you know, cut out certain segments of his Bible, but, you know, very much on the deist camp. And the majority of the founding fathers were deists. And what is their deism like? It's like, well, religion has its place. There's a God out there. We think we should support the church, probably because a less disciplined, less intelligent people need it. And, you know, as long as they're, if you don't have that in your culture, well, then you're going to have other problems because, and it's sort of an elitist position because, you know, smart people like us probably don't need it, but a lot of other people do. So it's sort of like saying, you know, you know, I'm not, I don't have a problem with drugs and alcohol. I, you know, I'll just have my, my brandy after dinner or my martini, but I don't get drunk and I'm not an alcoholic, but we need AA for all those people that struggle with that. And okay, fair enough. I'm not, not offended by this position. Jonathan Peugeot, it was, that was, again, if you haven't seen the ThinkSpot conversation between Peugeot and Benjamin, you should watch it. Sargon Avakad says, I don't want to go to church. And Jonathan Peugeot basically says, well, once you, once you get, once you get it, it doesn't bother you so much. It's like a spoonful of symbolic sugar helps the, helps the medicine go down. And it just made, it just made me laugh, but, but it, it completely typifies many of these conversations that I, that I have right now that people who 10 or 15 years ago would have sort of been cheering on Sam Harris. Yeah. What we really need to do is, is get rid of religion. Now people are like, well, you know, as long as they're not, you know, mucking around with getting evolution out of schools or, or getting prayer and well, even prayer, you know, and it's sort of, I mean, this, it was this attitude in, in the UK for quite a while that, well, religion is, is sort of important and it's good to keep around and, and, and people who perhaps aren't quite so smart or disciplined, they might need it, but generally speaking, it's good for the society, especially if it's a good religion. And, and you don't want, you don't want, you know, you don't want religion making a mess of things, but you need an attitude that's good for the society. And so, and I think enough of it around it so that people aren't corrupt and they're honest and they do what they say and they take care of their children, they take care of their homes and the property values don't go down. But, but when it comes to how people spend their time, and so when I listen to Sargon Avakad talk about this, I think, okay, so, so what does he think? Well, why would I want to, why would I want to spend my Sunday mornings going to listen probably to some preacher ramble on about a book that I think, oh, okay, it's the foundation of Western civilization and some of those ideas that we like, they're in there and so on and so forth. And then the music's going to be bad and it very well may be, and then the people are going to be annoying and I'm going to have to spend some time doing some chitchat to people who aren't never going to get me anywhere and they're going to take some of my money. And so, you know, that sort of was how church was perceived commonly during the Cold War in the United States when church attendance reached its peak. And Eugene Peterson, who, no relation to Jordan Peterson, a quite famous minister, sort of on the cusp of the main line and the evangelicals, you know, he planted some churches and someone would cough and come up to him, some businessman in a good suit making a lot of money, okay, pastor, now we go into the real world. And of course, Eugene Peterson would bristle at that and say, oh, but what is the real world? But the truth is all of that, well, other people should go there, but I won't want, that's not going to get anybody into church. You know, going to church, becoming religious, becoming a Christian isn't like buying a sensible car. And so here I found this GIF of, you know, they look like lovely people, but do you really want to own a minivan? So we've got all this status stuff. And generally speaking, don't gain a lot of status outside of the church community by saying you go to church. Some people might infer some things to it, some of those things positive, some of those things negative, but they're deciding to become a Christian and going to church regularly is not like buying a sensible car. It's more like falling in love. Church has a powerful impact on people. And I think about Jordan Peterson's conversation with David Nasser after his talk at the convocation at Liberty University, where, you know, and that's one of my favorite, that's one of my favorite conversations with Peterson, because here, here Peterson's across from, you know, a real bona fide pastor, a guy who, who knows his stuff, a guy who, you know, left Islam and converted to Christianity and is deep, deep in the midst of a certain subculture. And, but, but yet David Nasser clearly has been around the block and he's a sharp guy. And so that's a good conversation. Nasser knew enough of Peterson and Peterson didn't necessarily know much of Nasser, but it knows enough of Christianity. And so that was an excellent conversation. Church has a powerful impact on people when they start to go. And in fact, the impact is so powerful, the echoes usually last say two or three generations after the, sometimes after the genuine article and the genuine love has worn out. People who are raised in it often stay in it, not always, but two or three generations later, it's sorts of starts weeding, you know, twiddling off. I was this morning, I was going to jump right to this video and get doing it. And I started chatting with Jacob on the discord about my, my Jewish ancestry and genealogy and, you know, trying to figure out exactly which of my ancestors backslid from Judaism and where, you know, it seemed to be sometime in the 19th century. And, you know, one of my Jewish ancestors coming from a strong Jewish family marries a Dutch girl who was, you know, baptized in the, in the Dutch reformed church, cause you can go back and you can find baptism records, but they didn't baptize any of their kids. And then his son was, his youngest son was my great, great grandfather. And, you know, he's the one who sent my great grandfather to America when my great grandfather was 19 years old. And then a year or two later, then my great, great grandfather comes with his wife and maybe another sibling or two. And, and they move into Western Michigan and they join the Dutch reform church. And then my grandfather becomes a minister and my father's a minister and I'm a minister. So, you know, you have this religion is a very big deal and it, and it shapes us to such a deep way that, you know, children and grandchildren develop into it. And they convert into it sometimes with passion and purpose or zeal, or maybe they just started going to it because they wanted to fit in and all the neighbors were in terms of Dutch immigration. That was a big point. People who didn't necessarily go to church very much or participate in it with much zeal or enthusiasm come to America and suddenly this is the place where everyone's speaking your language. And so you get involved. And so you're there every Sunday and you know, you're sitting in there and you're singing the songs and you're listening to the domine and you're, and you're hearing the domine is the, the Lord, the Lord in Dutch. That was what the ministers were called. Now we're just pastors. We're not Lords. But, and then, you know, they catch it and, you know, my grandfather and my grandmother deeply, deeply Christian people and my father and my mother deeply Christian people. And so that's what happens in church. And it's more than just buying a sensible used car. It's, it's something you, you devote your life to and you devote your money to and you devote your time to it and you care about it. It's all 4P knowing. And so it's, it's good for the world, but you know, a lot of people, you know, it's, I'm glad it's in the world, but it's vital for my participation in the age to come. And now this is where a lot of people pay attention, especially with respect to Christianity, because this is a big deal. It's seeking heaven or avoiding hell. I just triggered all the Universalist conversations and the discord server and well, those who are direct, see direct. And so this is almost always what you hear from, well, atheists. Well, it's these Christian people who these ministers are making them fear hell. So they go to church and they're manipulating them with their fears. And well, yeah, that's, that's true. They've got a point to it. I probably shouldn't be touching this mic all the time. I just get a little, get a little anal about how it falls away. So, and you'll find that all over the place in Christianity, Martin Luther, he was studying to be a lawyer. He's traveling through the woods and there's a thunderstorm and, you know, cries out to St. Anne, I'll become a monk. Why? Because if you're a monk, well then you'll be saved for sure. So Martin Luther becomes an Augustinian monk and, and people have been running to the church to, to save their soul from afterlife perdition for generations and generations. You can, sinners in the hands of an angry God, Jonathan Edwards, famous sermon. That's a little hot. Evangelism explosion. D. James Kennedy, when I, before I was going to the Dominican Republic, the mission organization, the Christian Forum World Missions, you know, wanted to do a little evangelistic tool, you know, give us some evangelism tools. What did they give us? D. James Kennedy, evangelism explosion. I can find it in the church library here. What did you do? Well, you, you go and you knock on somebody's door and you say, okay, what would you say to Jesus to, if, to, to convince him to allow you into his heaven if you died tonight? Now, of course, this evangelistic method assumes that almost everybody that you knock on their door has some, at least latent anxiety about hell. And so, well, for many people, that's a big deal. So they're very anxious about their death. And of course, the celebrity atheists have come in and said, you don't have to be anxious about your death. There's nothing after death. You just, it's just the big sleep. Most Americans don't believe that. Most Americans are sort of soft universalists. Well, if I'm a good person, then, and of course, their, their idea about being a good person is, well, dependent upon their idea. You can go into jails and visit people and find jails are full of good people. You know, they're not pedophiles or ax murderers. So they're at least better than the pedophile on the cell down the way. So, you know, they all have their codes and they all their standards and everybody in Lake Wobegon is above average, but evangelism explosion and many of these things rely on, on sort of a latent anxiety about death and hell avoidance. The Willow Creek, you know, people going into evangelicalism very much motivated by people going into a Christless eternity. It tends to be all these different words that successive generations put on it to sort of update it and repristinate it and, and make it salient for, for the contemporary culture. Lately the ECT, eternal conscious torment gets into the whole universalist conversation. And that even cropped up this morning. I was, I was active on Twitter this morning and, and Peugeot has read David Bentley Hart's and of course book. And of course someone says, well, Paul, when are you going to read that book? And when are you going to talk about universalism? And maybe at some point, if you keep pestering me, maybe I won't be able to avoid it, but we'll see. But, but that's sort of been, well, people go to church in order to not go to hell and go to heaven when they, when they die. That's a perfectly legitimate reason to go to church. And it's something that's very old and deep with respect to Christianity. You have the lake of fire. You have the parable of the bridesmaids. You have Jesus. Jesus talks about, how shall I say it to avoid triggering all of you who are, just really want me to talk about universalism. Jesus talks about really uncomfortable afterlife digs based on your relational and moral performance in this world. And, and hell is sort of a funny thing that many people with their soft universalism sort of think, well, hell is sort of reserved for Mao and Hitler and my neighbor down this, down the road, who's a real jerk. Now I was talking to Julian yesterday. We didn't record the conversation. It's always fun talking to Julian. I talked to, I met Julian very early on in this whole thing. And he and I have had some wonderful conversations. And he reminded me of some stuff that I had read a while ago in, in, in Charles Taylor's A Secular Age. And this gets into this a lot because this idea of, well, well, church is just there because certain people are anxious about death and that's why they go. But I either think that hell isn't a real threat or I think that I'm good enough to make the cut or, or, you know, death is the big sleep. Therefore it's all, you know, that's, that's kind of a BS reason to go to church. But I think, I think Charles Taylor nicely notes here how actually this is all quite connected. Perhaps we might just take this as a given, particularly as a tradition goes so far before the modern period. But we can perhaps also see it as inseparable from the reforming enterprise itself. And I don't know if Tom Holland has read Charles Taylor, but there's a fair amount of, there's a fair amount of parallel between Tom Holland working on his reformatio and, and Charles Taylor on the reform. And, you know, at some point I'd like to probably do some more thinking about those things. If the aim is not just to make certain forms of spirituality shine forth and draw as many people as possible to them, if the goal is really to make everybody over, see, so really the hell avoidance and the it's good for the world takes are not really that separate and they haven't been separate historically because one thing is, well, I don't want to go to hell. And the other thing is, well, I don't want my neighbor to go to hell. Well, how gracious of you. But it's, well, we really do want to make everybody over. And, you know, when you look at the history of Protestantism, that was a big motivation. You might remember a conversation I had a while back with someone who was from New Haven, Connecticut, New Haven, Connecticut, who was basically set out to sort of be, you know, God's kingdom on earth. The Oneida community was a utopian kingdom. The pilgrims came to America in order to establish God's kingdom on earth. That's been a big theme in Protestantism, but also in, you know, part of the reason that I want Peugeot and Holland to talk more and compare more notes is because, you know, I've read some of Tom Holland's stuff on, you know, the Eastern Roman Empire and they, in many ways, you know, the king, there's a, there's a, there's a laying out the patterns in orthodoxy that is in its own way, a little bit distinct, a, a sort of, here we're setting up the kingdom of heaven right here on earth. So Jesus is in the dome, you've got the saints around you, and so sort of what happens with a, with a church in that mode, I mean, I had a question on the question and answer that I just posted on Tuesday about the, you know, why are Protestant churches so plain and Catholic and Orthodox churches so ornate, where they're doing different things with respect to embodying the kingdom of God, okay? That's part of what's beneath all of the architecture and the liturgy. And so this is what's been happening over and over and over again throughout the history of Christianity. And in some ways, this fear of losing Western civilization is also connected to it because in some ways, fans of Western civilization say, well, we have, we have, we have gotten closer to the kingdom of God on earth than let's say, communism or fascism or various corrupt organizations or countries around the world, and we don't want to lose it. So the kingdom of God is something we're always sort of reaching up to. And so in order to do this, well, you want to, you want to get the anti-corruption juice from Christianity and you want to get all of this into your neighbor because you want your neighbor to behave themselves and you want your neighbor to have a tender conscience and you want to have a kind of a, a kind of a, a neighbor to be community conscious and you want your neighbor to be all of these things because then living in a world where that you're sharing with your neighbor, the world will simply be better. So if the aim is not just to make a certain form of spirituality shine forth and to draw as many people as possible to them, if the goal is really to make everyone over or everybody who is not heading for damnation, then perhaps the only way you can ever hope to produce this kind of mass movement is by leaning heavily on threat or fear. Now, if you want to see this in action, watch the current conversation about climate change. Every time there's some form of natural disaster that can somehow be connected to the political motivation of for climate change, it's going to be made. So every time Gavin Newsom or PBS or, or, or someone in some media, every time there's a hurricane or a fire in California or anything happens, they keep connecting it to climate change. Now, I'm not saying it isn't connected, but it's the same motivation. We're going to scare America into getting off carbon for the sake of climate change. Now, anybody who has practiced a religion that has used this technique will be pretty familiar with the shortfall that fear can be a quite intense motivating factor in the short run. We see this in politics because, well, if you have, if you elect Trump, then we'll have theocracy, which to me is a really laughable threat. But if you elect Biden, then woke ism will prevail and he'll shut your churches and take away your freedom, et cetera, et cetera. People love using fear to motivate others. It's an effective thing. This is certainly the pattern set up very early on in the process of reform in the preaching mission of wandering friars from the 13th century. The irony is that where clerical leadership really managed to transform a community, it was through the personal holiness of the incumbent and not through his parading the horrors of hell. And I think you can see this in Jesus because whereas Jesus does talk about fear of shut doors and locked out of a party and places of outer darkness where there's weeping gnashing of teeth, Jesus, for the most part, didn't win his following by scaring them straight. That's not what Jesus did. And Jesus' relationship with his following was all often quite interesting. To quote a mission, a mission preacher at the time of the restoration in France, soon the hour of your death will sound. Continue the web of your disorders. Sink yourselves deep into the mire of your shameful passions. Insult by the impiety of your heart him who judges even the just. Soon you will fall under the pitiless blows of death and the measure of your iniquities will be that of the fearful torments which will be inflicted upon you. Okay, so this wasn't just a Protestant thing. This is Protestants and Catholics used fear. We're going to make the society better by scaring everyone straight. Once one goes down this route, something else follows. The threat is to attach to very clearly defined failures. Okay, so well, if you continue to pump CO2 into the atmosphere, then you will have California fires. So therefore, vote for this certain party in order to address climate change. That's what you have to do to make the whole fear thing work. And that's why if you keep the fear nebulous, you've always got to attach it to a specific thing, Charles Taylor says, and he's right. Do this or else damnation will follow. The this has to be clearly definable. Of course, there were periods, particularly in the Calvinist theological context, in which it has to remain ultimately uncertain whether anyone had really been chosen by God. But as Weber points out, this is an unlivable predicament. And very soon, certain signs of election crystallization out. Whatever the lack of theological warrant in the context of Catholic Reformation, the relevant standards are not signs of election, but minimal conformity to the demands of God, the avoidance of mortal sin, or at least whatever is necessary to have these sins remitted. What emerges from all this is that we might what we might call moralism. That is the crucial importance given to a certain code of our spiritual lives. We should all come close to God. But at a crucial stage on this road has to be the minimal conformity to the code. I remember one founding member of Livingstone's church is no longer with us, but one founding member once asking me, how many times really do you need to go to church each month to make the cut? He didn't quite use that language, but that's exactly what he was asking. And I thought, yeah, you haven't really heard anything about misery, deliverance, gratitude. Without this, you aren't even at the starting line, as it were, of this crucial journey. You are not in the game at all. This is perhaps not an outlook, which is easy to square with a reading of the New Testament, but it nevertheless achieved a kind of hegemony across broad reachers of the Christian church in the modern era. And I think, um, Charles Taylor is right there. Now you might shake your head and say, oh, those Christians scaring people with hell. But like I said, with climate change or, or losing Western civilization or, you know, having the gulag show up in North America because of all the woke, um, neo fascists, well, humanity must be preserved. And so Brett and Heather every, you know, every week are putting out podcasts about, well, how we have to save this planet. Humanity must be preserved. And so you sort of have this unconsciously assumed Christian theological construct of us. You, you just think in your mind humanity. And I think as John Gregg quite noted, this is simply a brought to us from Christianity. Whereas, you know, as late as the 19th century, the Navajo and the American desert Southwest had the people and everyone else. And you'll find throughout history, Greeks and barbarians, Romans and barbarians, Jews and Gentiles, part of the legacy of Christianity as we get this one, this idea of one of humanity as one race, one family. And I would assert that Christianity is, is quite anti-racist from the beginning. Thank you very much. Even if we don't always live up to these things, the imaginative projection pass their own life. We have to save the world. Well, what do you care? Brett and Heather, you're both in your fifties. You're probably going to be dead in less than 50 years. Well, I care about my children. Okay. But then maybe you'll care about your grandchildren. If this next generation ever actually produces any grandchildren for some of us, um, what do you care? You're not going to suffer, but right now I imagine the sufferings of future generations. If we lose Western civilization. Okay. So what do you really want? Well, I want a rational, very direct, sensible heaven. Well, not really heaven, but what do you mean? Well, we don't want eternal conscious torment. We don't even want temporary conscious torment. We want a less human con we want less human conscious torment through scientific and political means. Okay. Well, this isn't terribly different from a religion. In fact, again, as I've been asserting, it really is one and it's deeply Christian all the way through. Now, the third reason to go to church is it's good for me. Well, and I would say if you look at Brett and Heather, if you look at Jordan Peterson, if you look at Carl Benjamin, none of them are going to church, even if they think, well, maybe going to church will be good for other people. Okay. Or maybe going to church will be, you know, well, I'm not really afraid of hell. So, or at least not anxious enough to have me go to church until at least, you know, I've baptized a number of 70 year olds. Um, I get to the point of a little anxious about my death and, you know, well, well, well, what could it hurt if I, you know, church people are nice and they have casseroles and you get to be older and, you know, you don't have as many things to do with your time and you find other nice people. And so, you know, if the music isn't too bad and the preacher doesn't drone on too long, maybe it's not so bad. Well, the real reason that a lot of people go to church and really get into church and excited about church is it's good for me. It's not just good for my kids. It's not just good for my neighbor. It's not just going to save the world. It's not just about hell avoidance. I find that I need to go because I'm a little better person when I do go. Now, again, in that verveky Jonathan Peugeot conversation, which was really outstanding, you know, you get to a point and, and, and it was John Vervecky had some really interesting ideas about, well, why don't you do some things and then talk to your friends and ask if it's making you a better person. That's not exactly how we set it off to pull up that video and, and find exactly that quote, but it's maybe I'll do it right now. Okay. There's, there's, there's just so much good stuff in this video. You just got to play some of it in one way and challenging it another. So what's the claim at like overwhelmingly people who have committed themselves to a tradition by all of the best measures we have, and we're getting pretty good, we're getting better measures and theory on this. They, they turn out to be wiser than people who are outside of a wisdom tradition. So if you can, you know, and I'm going to piss people off, probably would have say this, but you know, people within a particular religious tradition generally do better on wisdom measures than people who are purely secular. The evidence keeps mounting on this. I know, I know people don't like when I say that because no, that must not be true. I'm sorry. But, and so that's the part that Jonathan was probably, you know, cheering about the confetti's following. But the part that's problematic is that that same research shows that no one of these paths has any distinct advantage over the other. Right. Of course. Advantage in terms of maybe, maybe John and Jonathan and I can go a little deeper in this conversation. Advantage in terms of well, what way and what advantage, because obviously the whole afterlife thing you're not going to be able to measure, but there's also certain tell-offs. There's certain, there's certain outcomes that particular traditions will want to move you towards that other, other traditions might not move you towards. Anyway, that's, that's not where I wanted to go with this. And so that's, that's the part maybe where the clowns come out or something. I don't know. But I have an analogy about that. And I want to, I want to present it to you, Jonathan, because I don't think I've done that before. So I, as a, as a martial artist, I grew up with lots of people who were purists, right? Stay in your tradition no matter what. Right. And that was, that was the thing. And people who stood out, stepped outside of there, you'll never get to the depths. And then about 15 years ago, we had the MMA revolution, which actually is backed by a lot of good cognitive science, that people that integrate across their traditions regularly kick the ass of the purists because they have just a richer, more complexified, adaptive repertoire of skills and maneuvers to bring to bear. And I'm suggesting to you that couldn't that be the case also for these, you know, we have martial art traditions. Couldn't there be something like the analog of MMA for the wisdom traditions? And that's kind of how I'm seeing what I'm trying to do. I think it's an interesting idea. I think it's, I think it's an interesting idea. I would tend to think that one of the, one of the difficult, let's see, how can I say this? One of the things in MMA, which is clear is that, you know, you know, it works because the other person gets beaten and they're down. Right. And so the difficulty with spirituality is preles, is that people self aggrandize and imagine things and think that they're doing great. And they think that they're spiritual when they're actually extremely selfish and extremely self-centered. And so one of the difficulty. And again, well, obviously that's a Christian metric, metric, because on Christianity, the idea is to not be selfish and not be self-centered, to be loving. And actually C.S. Lewis goes into that a little bit, but the, you know, right there, you see how in so many ways, the, the assumptions beneath Christianity have, have, have underlie our assumptions about, okay, what does a spiritual person look like? These that I've had with the hodgepodge approach is mostly that you tend to accrue to yourself things, which you, which you're fine with. And you don't have to deal with the harder aspects of spirituality because you've got no one to hold it up to you. Right. You don't have a spiritual father to say, you need to fast. And you're like, Oh no, I like this prayer stuff, but I don't want the fasting stuff. Like who needs that? It's just, it's just bogus. And so one of the things that a tradition does is that it forces you to deal with things that you don't want to deal with. And even, even in terms of church, like church has a lot of functions, but one of the things church, one of the functions of church is that it's not, it's actually not a place of like-minded people that get together. It's not like a club of people who are all, let's say like, let's say the people that are following my videos and we have groups, symbolic world groups of discussion. It church is not like that church is the jerk and the bigot and the, the, the person who can't stop talking and all these annoying people that you have to deal with all the time, which is part of, which is part of the spiritual growth, which is you're forced to deal with things. It's similar to family. In that sense, you're forced to deal with things and people and practices that you don't like, and you don't want to do. And so that's one of the reasons why, although I think the image of the MMA is actually, is actually, is an interesting idea. The best would be to have wise, saintly figures who can integrate the best from, from the wisdom traditions and then be able to teach it in a way that is, that fits within the world. Like, so I can imagine Aquinas, like Aquinas reads Avaro A's and reads the, the, the different, and Dante obviously read, you know, obviously read some Sufi mystics. It's clear that he did. And so, but then when he presents it back, then he presented in a way that's palatable for my aunt and for all like kind of normal people. That's how I see that. That's how I see the best version of your MMA analogy. This is the part that I've often, when I watch these videos, there's, there's something that I hear and I think, oh, that's, that's interesting. But the real test is two, three, four days later. If I, if it comes back to me again and again and again, it's sort of, okay, this is, this I got to chew on this. I got to work through. And, and I thought this was a particularly good, element of the exchange. This, this one individual, his father was, was Muslim and his mother was Christian in terms of their backgrounds. And he's kind of like, you know, these are, these are rebel wisdom members. I suppose they, you know, they're, they're key supporters of the rebel wisdom project. And many of you know, sort of what rebel wisdom is about. So I thought this was a particularly interesting interchange. Not my father's a Muslim. My mom's English. And he wasn't particularly Orthodox, but I didn't love what you told me about Muslim. And I don't, there's a lot about Muslim. I don't particularly think it's great, but whatever, you know, I mean, I wasn't that traumatized. There was some crazy people in my house that was super sort of Orthodox. And I saw that and I was like, wow, that's not cool. So, I mean, I would recommend to you that you, instead of thinking of a tradition first, I think seriously what Jonathan said a few minutes ago, and I'll try to maybe respond a bit to it about, you know, traditions, traditions should challenge our narcissism. And I think that's an important point he just made. I don't think that my analogy was meant to ignore that. So, but I don't think you necessarily have to start that. Typically what people do is they start the wrong way around is what I'm trying to say. They start with what beliefs do I really agree with, and then I'll try and find the tradition accordingly. I think you should first, and now I'm going to speak more as a cognitive scientist, maybe Jonathan's right, that's maybe ultimately where I stand. I think you should find the practices that are bringing about transformation. And this is what I say to people when I teach them the meditation and the Tai Chi, your judgment about the transformation isn't the primary thing. If people around you, independently of you doing, like keep it as almost a secret as much as possible, if people around you are noticing the transformation, noticing the healing, then that practice is taking for you. And you know, this is the classic, and this is across multiple religious and philosophical traditions, by their fruits you shall know them, right? Take up practices that are leading to real transformation, and then do some of the scientific work on them, read about them, because each practice has strengths and weaknesses. Try to find at least two practices that have complementary strengths and weaknesses that are bringing about real transformation in your life that other people are reliably reporting to you. Then once you see what it's taking for you, then start to look around for a home, a home that will do one of the things that Jonathan says, that will give you, like will give you somebody who can give you feedback, critical feedback, things like that. That would be my recommendation to you. I think that's really, really impressive. You know, I've been thinking about this again, again, so I'm glad I'm hearing it again. It's also a function of whatever is, whatever in the community is seen as the goal, okay? Because I've been in enough religious, in fact enough little Christian religious communities to note that communities reinforce some things according to what the community wants. You know, if someone starts coming to church and, you know, this person continues to volunteer in a certain way, the community is going to reinforce that. And so when you get down into this whole change me thing, well, the, you know, the community is going to reinforce what is in a sense at the pinnacle, or at least in terms of the good that the community imagines a human being should be. What I start with, what is leading reliably and not just your own first person perspective, because that's actually not our wisest perspective, but what you have good reason to believe from other people, find those practices that are healing and transformative, precisely because they are challenging that, and then find a home for them. And again, this isn't to dismiss what John is saying at all, but every community has its, I want to say telos, every community has its goal. And what the community will do is subtly both encourage and discourage whatever is leading towards the goal of that community, whatever values are sort of built into that community. That's the advice I would give to you. Well, I would, what I would maybe say, especially in your situation where you, you seem to have come from two, let's say two sides, and also you live in, I think you seem to live in Europe or you seem to have at least been connected with Western culture. I think that what John said is very good. Maybe from the other side, I would say one of the things that you can do quite simply is to read, to read, let's say, especially if you're, if you have these two histories with Islam and Christianity, I would say to read the story, to read the story of the two figures, for example, right? To just read the story of Christ and to read the story of Muhammad and to see if there's one of those stories that you identify with. That's not a fair fight. Because again, I mean, we've been talking about how deeply the West has been shaped by Christianity. And anyway, I wanted to give, I wanted to give Jonathan a chance to, chance to rebut in that. So anyway, back to this, why do people go to church? Well, it's good for the world. That probably won't bring you to church. Well, it's vital for my participation in the age to come. Well, maybe, but in my experience, exactly what John, exactly what Charles Taylor notes, if you say, well, you've got to go to this or, and if someone's fear of damnation is so poignant, what will happen exactly what Charles Taylor says, it will fix on one thing and it might be tithing or church going or avoiding particular sins or this or that. If fear is a motivator, if fear is the motivator, then, then a hierarchy will develop in terms of the things that, that, that are exactly needed to make the cut. And that's the one thing that the person will focus on. And it might be church going, it might be avoiding certain particular sins. And so that's, that's actually not a very good motivator. And again, you don't, whereas Jesus certainly warns about consequences for things, you don't find Jesus for fronting that in terms of, in terms of his ministry. And so I think finally, we are, we are rather mercenary and selfish. And so what, what actually changes our behavior is, is it's good for me. It's something I have to do. And it's, and it's, and I think again, for Vickie's point there, I thought was, was really well said, not only in terms of, we should listen to others in terms of trying to get some idea of whether or not I'm improving and the community around you again, will manifest that with respect to the telos that is in that community. But, but something we'll have to, we are always looking outside ourselves and saying, okay, am I, am I doing better? And again, this, the side of our brain that is taking in and processing things intuitively is always sort of giving you a sense of, well, I feel my life is going pretty well. I feel like my life isn't going very well. And, you know, sort of that right path, right track, wrong track thing that politicians do. Now, one of the, one of the big ways that this has come through in our culture is AANV. This was a hedgehog review, and I talked about it in a sermon a while ago. I have, I come to the point in my life where I recognize that if I continue down this path, it will destroy me. I have seen the enemy and it is not the other political party. It is not the other religious group. It is not the other nation. It is not the bad people in the way that I construct badness. It is me. I am my worst enemy. I need to change. And I think involvement in this community and this religious organization, in this process, in this program, involvement in this community will help me become not only what I want to be of Jordan Peterson's sort of realization, I think is dead on right. You not only have to pursue a goal, you also have to run away from his goal, sort of his life authoring program. So I want to become, in Christianity, I want to become like Christ, and I don't want to become the opposite of Christ of what I would be in terms of the opposite of Christ. And just this recognition, again, the verveci language is so helpful here. There is reciprocal narrowing that we see in addiction, and addiction has in many ways within our culture sort of become the epitome of evil. Okay. I don't want to get caught in a process of reciprocal narrowing. I want to be involved in a process of reciprocal broadening. But again, now that broadening and exactly what that will mean in the texture, thinking about long conversation I had with Byrne Powers in terms of the texture, I will get the sense that I am actually becoming a better person because I can see some milestones that I have, but when I listen to others, they could say, yeah, yeah, you are growing in, again, whatever the telos of that community is. And, you know, we are all a little ADHD, and we get distracted. And so Jordan Peterson's conversation about church, why I don't go to church, you can just Google that, you can just search for that video on YouTube, why Jordan doesn't go to church. Jordan doesn't go to church because he doesn't see the point to it. And he and his wife visited an Orthodox church, and Jordan said, yeah, my wife kind of liked it. But he didn't see the point to it. He didn't see how, okay, so Jordan, yeah, we need to keep the Bible in Western civilization, but, you know, sort of like Carl Benjamin, maybe for other people, but not for me. Well, sometimes what we find in our life is that I need to go to church. I need to go to church because I lose my equilibrium. I need to go to church because it keeps me recalibrated. I need to go to church because I need regular reminders. And more importantly, that community, and this is where these communities have principalities, and these communities have built within them some communally constructed ideal notion of what it means to be a good person with respect to the values of that community. And that's part of what religious organizations do. And, but then of course, there's always the new hotness. There's, and in Christianity, you see that there's the hot church and the hot idea and the hot religion. And, you know, Nathan Jacobs, I make these slides so I can remember what I was going to say, you know, Nathan Jacobs, and Nathan Jacobs got a PhD in the seminary that I got my master's in. And so he, you know, wound up in my tradition and had a lot of very favorable things to say about the Christian Reformed Church and the lovely people he met at Calvin Theological Seminary. And then he goes off and becomes Orthodox. And, you know, that's, God bless him. I'm not going to, nor will the people at that seminary, I think, you know, hold that against him. But you just look at, you know, the movie that he made, which you can find on Amazon. It's a good movie, out of which he gave the talk that he gave at the, you know, American Orthodox Church, you know, becoming truly human. And so one of the things that I see is this idea of, I'm not going to get too deep into theology here, but this idea of my transformation. And I wouldn't say this is that Orthodoxy has a corner on this, perhaps Orthodoxy is talking about it in a way that is really capturing the imagination and as the vision that a lot of people are finding that engaging in this process, going into this tradition will allow me to become basically what is at the top of the hierarchy of values of that tradition. So we begin by blaming the other, like, you know, the other political party, the other nation, the other religious group, and we begin to realize we can't embody or accomplish our own ideas. And so I need a community and a track and a process to really shape me and bring me there. And our ideals, our own ideals might not be that good. And so the question is, how can I become truly human, which is, of course, the title of Nathan Jacobs, even when I'm fuzzy about the goal. And again, I think, I think Jonathan Peugeot, maybe I'll just grab that little clip. Part of what was cool in this video was this conversation about Gnosticism. And actually, I agree with a lot of what both John and Jonathan said here. But what Jonathan says here, I think, really captured in a nutshell, because, you know, it's taken me coming from a Protestant tradition to sort of figure out, okay, what's with Orthodoxy? What's with the liturgy, the divine liturgy? What's with the buildings and the art and exactly what is this program? Because in many ways, again, Protestantism is very direct. It's very linear. Here's the ideas. You know, my professor at Calvin's Seminary, who taught teaching, one of my favorite professors, Spud Snapper, I don't remember which way it went because I'm dyslectic, but mug and jug teaching was from my mug to your jug, or from my jug to your mug. It's basically that I'll just put the information directly into you and it goes into your head, then you'll have it, then you'll do it. And, you know, everything we know about how humans work is that we're not really that direct. And so how, in fact, does personal transformation happen? The Catholic or the Orthodox position phrase things the way they did. They phrase things the way they did to preserve certain things. One, they did it to preserve the goodness of creation, because at least in their perception, there are ways in which the this is contra the Gnostics. Gnostics presented the world in which the world itself was evil, that the physical world itself is evil. That this is how Christians at least... And this is where this is where Sam had this idea about Bret Weinstein's Gnosticism, because, well, it's a genocidal spelling bee. That's what evolution is, according to Bret Weinstein. So it must be evil. So wouldn't the maker of this world, though, there's no maker of this world. So where does evil and good come from anyway? He's perceived with the Gnostics believe that manifest reality is in itself evil. And so what they posited was to preserve the original goodness of creation. And then second of all was to preserve the incarnational principle. That is to preserve the notion that Christ was both God and man. And in that vision, that there is a place, there's a possibility for the physical created world to be fully and completely united with the divine principle. And that this isn't, this is not only is it possible, but it is the very purpose of why reality exists. That is the reason for why creation exists, why everything exists so that it can become a vehicle, a vessel for manifestation of God. And so that is the reason why Christians, let's say, phrase their theology the way they did all the early, all the early Christological debates, that's all they're about. They're all about making sure that we say Christ is a man, and making sure that we say Christ is God and finding a way to say so that it's not confused. And like I said, the reason to do that is to preserve those things. And so whether I feel like the modern world is actually like, the modern world is, let's say in transhumanism, and in a lot of the strains that we're seeing now, that it's actually quite gnostic in the kind of antinatalism, the kind of anti, that this hatred of even in the ecological movement, you see a form of hatred of man, like an idea that man is somehow bad, that the things we do in the world are in themselves bad. And to me, then of course, Peterson picks up on this. But if you understand then this vision that Jonathan has, well, suddenly, the vision of orthodoxy of the patterns and understanding the patterns and getting in alignment with the patterns and community doing this and doing this together, you can begin to understand the whole project of that whole project of that church. And you know, it's, and now suddenly, okay, well now we can sort of figure out what Peugeot is about. And it's very difficult for Protestants, because again, Protestants are much more direct, much more linear, much more instrumental, much more rational. And if you understand that aspect of Protestantism, you can sort of understand why this scientism and atheism are outgrowths of that directness, that rationality of Protestantism. And you can also understand sort of where, you know, Carl Benjamin might say, well, the church was pretty and the liturgy was kind of long, and the music was lovely, and there was beauty to it. But it was, it didn't, because in many ways to be Protestant is to be much more direct. Well, it didn't enable me. And now, again, if we deconstruct some of this stuff, well, it didn't offer me insight that I could apply to my life. And again, if you go to a Protestant service, you'll hear, well, there's the sermon, and here's the teaching of the Bible, and here's the insight. Now apply that to your life. And now I'm not trying to set these things up against each other, because of course, that type of linear approach is itself in the Bible as well. And you can look at the book of James, for example, talking about someone who forgets what their own face looks like, and they hear the word, but they don't do it. And Jesus talks about ever seeing. And so I'm not asking in either or between the traditions, but I'm trying to highlight how this other tradition pursues basically self-improvement. And I think that's, I don't want to use that word, because it's kind of dismissive, but you can begin to understand exactly the logic of these different traditions. So how can I be transformed? Well, even when I'm fuzzy on the goal. And this is when Carl Benjamin just, when he said this, I just thought, I've had this conversation so often in the last three years. Can't we have a direct rational religion? Well, what do you mean by that? Can't you just lay down and give me a program that will save me, save the world? And if there is an afterlife, afford me what I need in it. Again, I was watching this Egyptian documentary on Netflix and just fascinated because what are they doing? They're setting themselves up that the temple, the pyramid, the machinery, what they bury, the things on the walls, the spells, all of that is to afford them, you know, basically a new entry into the next life to come. And now Carl Benjamin, well, might have, I don't know if he has any anxiety about what happens after he dies or any of that. But if you look at, you know, plan B, Brett and Eric Weinstein's, Pat, you know, pursuit, it's all about, well, what can we put in our hands to deliver to us the, to secure for us the life that we want? And if you've listened to any of my sermons, you know that I'm deeply skeptical about such a project. And, and in that way, Peugeot is just such a good, he's such a good conversation partner in some of this because he has some illustrations that, you know, that are really quite good. And I would just ask, you know, someone who was thinking along these lines, do you have a rational spouse or lover? What do I mean by that? Well, did you fall in love and then sort of make things work or did you sit down and rationally lay it out? There's this Married at First Sight, this silly little show on, on television, and they have, of course, have pastors and psychologists and they do all the matchmaking and they put the people together. And what you very quickly see is that, as I've said many times in my videos before, we are so complex that if you tried to sort of distill everything about your life down into sort of the left brain syllogisms, you would not have enough time in your life to manage all the complexities that you are. If you sat down and say, okay, the romantic or marital relationship that my parents had growing up, if you're lucky enough to grow up with your biological parents, if you sat down and tried to articulate everything that was an aspect of that relationship, you would not have time in your life to exhaust it. We are that complex. And so it's for that reason that we're not rational about our spouse or lover. You know, how many times you walk into a room and bang, I remember the first time I saw the woman that would be my wife and she immediately caught my attention. And I thought about her and she caught the attention of a lot of other guys because she was an insanely beautiful woman. And right now everybody Google's Paul VanderKlay's wife. I talked to Benjamin Boise, he's met my wife. He knows how, how insanely beautiful my wife is. Maybe just, no, she's not just insanely beautiful to me, but you know, I remember the first time I saw my wife and I immediately had my attention and it was a little while before I actually got a chance to meet her. And then, you know, I remember our first meeting and actually, and then she, she and I then lived in the same apartment building on campus and yada, yada, yada. I'm very patient at pursuing my goals, but you're not rational about these things. It's not direct. And if you try to go that way, you'll find it just doesn't really work because life is way too complex. Do you have a rational patriotism? Well, I think it's rational. Yeah, but I bet you it has everything to do with all sorts of other things. I know they always the argument. Well, you wouldn't be a Christian if you're born in another country. Okay. I understand the force of that argument. Wouldn't you, wouldn't you be a patriot to Iran if you were born there? Now I know a fair number of Iranian people that listen to my videos and some of them live in the States and that's just how complex that is. And they would say they love their country, but they don't particularly like the direction that their country has taken. And probably all of us could say that about this. Can't we have a rational direct religion? No, you can't. Just like you don't have a rational direct marriage, you don't have a rational direct relationship with your country. There's plenty of rationality involved and you use rationality in order to process it, but you will never have a rational direct religion. Because life is far too complex. And so Peugeot just jumps in patterns, patterns, I tell you, and the patterns lay themselves out and these patterns are going to manifest. Try resisting sleep. Go ahead. If you try really well, you'll probably make yourself crazy. And so what Peugeot is trying to do in terms of his processes to say, well, you know, these are, these are the patterns and this church program, again, I'm not critiquing it. I'm not in that program. Obviously, being part of a Protestant church, we have a, that gets way, way complex, but you know, you don't have it rational or direct. It's not simply going to be. And so whether or not you go to church or whether or not you decide to go to a church or whether or not you decide to give it a try, churches for people who basically come to terms with the irrationality of a whole lot of things and devote themselves to a program, usually for very personal reasons. Now it's 330. Okay. Back to the book, miracles. And after my conversation with JP Marceau and, and, um, John Verveke, I've, I've really thought hard about diving back into this book because, well, how, if it, if it's not exactly direct and rational, how does, how does this stuff really work? And part of there's, there's a really great chapter in miracles called horrid red things. I don't know. I could ramble about it or maybe I should just read some of it. What Carl Benjamin gets tied up in is, well, the mythology. On one hand, that might say, well, I love the mythology, but this is where you get into John, um, uh, Brett Weinstein's metaphorical truth. And, you know, I was thinking about this book in the lead up to my conversation with John Verveke and JP Marceau and then more after, and then rereading this chapter, realizing that he is talking exactly about what Brett Weinstein is talking about with respect to metaphorical truth. This chapter 10 called horrid red things. And you can almost always tell a lot about the chapter because Lewis pays a lot of attention to the little quote he puts to head the chapter. We can call the attempt to refute theism by displaying the continuity of belief in God with primitive delusions to the method of anthropological intimidation at when Bevan symbolism and belief chapter two, I have argued that there are no secure, that there's no security against miracle to be found by the study of nature. She's not, she's not the whole of reality, but only a part for all we know, she might be a small part. If that which is outside her wishes to invade her, um, she has so far as we can see no defenses, but of course, many who disbelieve in miracles will admit this. Now, again, part of, part of what a bunch of people want to talk to me about is the definition of a miracle. And my definition of a miracle, I am, I am not much of a supernaturalist. Now, Lewis will use the word supernatural quite a bit. I'm not much of a supernaturalist by the way that supernaturalism is used in the world today because supernaturalism is imagined to be a break in nature. And Lewis's idea is that it's not so much a breaking of nature. It's more the difference in patterns in nature as a result of the king coming to nature. Okay. In other words, the water will simply flow in the bathtub unless you put your hand in it and move it. And what this book is really about is that rationality capital R is in a way, God's working down through into the system. It's the group B type thing that moves the water, that moves reality. And so we have this deist conception of getting back again to Charles Taylor of this buffered self and there something comes in and breaks it. Well, if in 1849, one could say they could get from New York to San Francisco in five hours, that would seem to be a miracle. Whereas by the end of the 20th century, it was a very regular occurrence. Well, why is that? Is that a fault of nature? You say, no, that's because of technology. Some technology looks pretty miraculous. Technology today affords things that would be called miracles in other places. I really like the aquarium illustration that JP Marceau got from Lewis here in that, well, and then the point that I made to John Verbecky is that, well, let's imagine that you've never experienced a tornado on the American plains. Well, can wind move that fast? You might say, no, well, it's outside of your experience. Our lives are shaped by these experiences and then what we tend to project then out from there. Okay. But many who disbelieve in miracles would admit all this. Their objection comes from the other side. Now he's really talking about Christianity that basically said, well, God created sort of a deism. God created this system and he wouldn't interrupt it. Okay. How would you know? They think that the supernatural would not invade. They accuse, they would say that it has done, they accuse those who say that it has done so of having a childish and unworthy notion of the supernatural. They therefore reject all forms of supernaturalism, which assert such interferences and invasions, and especially the form called Christianity for which the miracles or at least some miracles are more closely bound up with the fabric of the whole belief than in any other. All the essentials of Hinduism would, I think, remain unimpaired if you subtract the miraculous and the same could also be true of Islam. But you cannot do that with Christianity. It is precisely the story of a great miracle. A naturalistic Christianity leaves out all that is specifically Christian. The difficulties of the unbeliever do not begin with questions about this or that particular miracle. They begin much further back. When a man who has only the ordinary modern education looks into any authoritative statement of Christian doctrine, he finds himself face to face with what seems to be holy savage or primitive picture of the universe. He finds that God is supposed to have a son, just as if God were a mythological deity like Jupiter or Odin. He finds that this son is supposed to have come down from heaven, just as if God had a palace in the sky which he had sent down his son like a parachutist. He finds that this son then descended into hell, into some land of dead underneath the surface of presumably flat earth and hence ascended again as if by balloon into his father's sky palace, where he finally sat down in a decorated chair placed a little to his father's right, the Apostle's Creed. Everything seems to presuppose a conception of reality which the increase of our knowledge has been steadily refuting for the last 2,000 years and which no honest man in his senses would return to today. And I would imagine, for the likes of Carl Benjamin and a great number of people, even Tom Holland who's sort of saying, I'm leaning into the story and not worrying about some of these other things, a chapter like this could be a tremendous help. It is this impression which explains the contempt even discussed felt by many people for the writings of modern Christians. When once a man is convinced that Christianity in general implies a local heaven, a flat earth, and a God who can have children, we naturally listen with impetition. To our solutions of particular difficulties and our defenses against particular objections. The more ingenious we are in such solutions and defenses, the more perverse we seem to him. Of course, he says, once the doctrines are there, clever people can invent clever arguments to defend them. Just as when once a historian has made a blunder, he can go on inventing more and more elaborate theories how it appears to have not been a blunder. And we find this kind of thing with all sorts of defenses about the Bible as such. But the real point is that none of these elaborate theories would have been thought of if he had read his documents carefully in the first instance. In the same way, it is not clear that Christian theology would never come into existence at all if the writers of the New Testament had had the slightest knowledge of what the real universe is actually like. Now, when he's saying real universe, he's talking about, well, these, at least in the middle of the 20th century, these scientific conceptions of, well, we're on a globe and we're going around the globe. And if you listen to the beginning of my conversation with J.P. Marceau and John Vervecky, I made the comment that I started reading this book because it was exactly these issues that I was dealing with in my ministry and in my own faith with respect to how on earth can I teach people the Bible when in Genesis, and I'm sorry to a lot of people who, you know, don't see it this way, then Genesis, the world seems to be a flat table with a bowl over the top and water's above and water below. And when God floods the world, he opens the flood gates above and the flood gates below and the water rushes in and you have Tohu Wavohu once again, and then God drains it and you have creation restored. How are you going to say this in a world where we all seem to be on this ball circling around the sun? How do these two worlds come together and how can we in fact continue to see the Bible as authoritative while this other thing is not, while this other thing, it just seems to be wrong about these things. And I think a great many people really struggle with this. And so the idea that many people tried to have was let's see if we can rejigger, let's say Genesis 1 to be talking about a ball. And so then, and then people would say to me, well, the clouds, those are the waters above. It's like, I accept that the sun and the moon and the stars are beneath the firmament. So if you're going to do it that way, you're going to have to be, you're going to have to have your firmament and waters above further out than any telescope can see. And people say, okay. It's like, okay. But the real point is that none of these elaborate theories would have been thought of if he had read the documents correctly in the first place. In the same way, it's not clear that Christian theology would never have come into existence at all if the writers of the New Testament had had the slightest knowledge of what the real universe is actually like. Thus, at any rate, I used to think myself, the very man who taught me to think, a hard satirical atheist, ex-Presbyterian, the old knock, as he was called, and again, you can read that in Lewis biographies, who doted on the golden bow and filled his house with the products of a rationalist press dissociation. In other words, C.S. Lewis, one of C.S. Lewis's most important and best teacher was as hardcore a rational atheist as you can find in this world. Though at the same way, he was a man as honest as the daylight to whom I here willingly acknowledge an immense debt. His attitude to Christianity was for me the starting point of adult thinking. You may say it is bred into my bones, and yet those days I have come to regard that attitude as total mis- as a total misunderstanding. And basically, this chapter gets into how did Lewis think through that problem that I was wrestling with, and therefore found Lewis and found this chapter and a good number of other chapters in his book. Remembering as I do from within the attitude of the impatient skeptic, I realize how very well, I realize very well how he was forearmed against anything I might say for the rest of this chapter. I know exactly what this man is going to do, he murmurs. He is going to start explaining all these mythological statements away. It is the invariable practice of these Christians. In any matter where on science has not yet spoken, and on which he cannot be checked, this is God of the gaps, they will tell you some preposterous fairy tale. And then the moment science makes a new advance and shows, as it invariably does, their statement to be untrue, they suddenly turn around and explain that they didn't mean what they said, that they were using a poetic metaphor or construing an allegory, and that all they really intend was some harmless moral platitude. They are sick of this theological thimble rigging. Now I have a great deal of sympathy with that sickness, and I freely admit that modernist Christianity has constantly played such a game of which the impatient skeptic accuses it. But I also think that there is a kind of explaining which is not explaining away. In one sense I am going to do what the skeptic thinks I am going to do, that is, I am going to distinguish what I regard as the core or real meaning of the doctrines from that which their expression which I regard as inessential and possibly even capable of being changed without damage. He is going to talk about metaphorical truth, but not exactly according to Eric Weinstein's definition. But then what will drop away from the real meaning under my treatment will precisely not be the miraculous. It is the core itself, the core scraped as clean of inessentials as we can scrape it, which remains for me entirely miraculous supernatural, nay, if you will, primitive and yet magical. In order to explain this I must now touch on a subject which has an importance quite apart from our present purpose, and of which everyone who wishes to think clearly should make himself master as soon as he possibly can. And he ought to begin by reading Mr. Owen Barfield's Poetic Diction and Mr. Edwin Bevin's Symbolism and Belief. But for the present argument it will be enough to leave the deeper problems to one side and proceed in a popular and unambiguous matter. I am going to talk to a, I am going to talk to someone who is an expert in Owen Barfield next week with my friend Michael. When I think about London I usually see a mental picture of Euston Station, but when I think as I do that London has several million inhabitants I do not mean that there are seven million images of people contained in my image of Euston Station, okay. Now understand what he's doing. When I think about New York City I think about the World Trade Centers because that's where we'd often go when I was a kid because you'd go up to the top and look at windows of the world and look out into the world. That's what we did. I think about taking the tube, taking the the path down under the World Trade Centers and coming out there. I think about you know all the things I did in New York City as a child and as a young adult. That's what I think about. But again thinking about cognitive science we cannot exhaust New York City, even one room within New York City, if we were to actually try to exhaust it our whole life long. It is that complex and so what we do is we boil down the world into images that can be useful into thinking about the whole and they are always reductions but in a sense what we're doing is a little bit of relevance realization at least imperfectly. In fact though I have the image while I am thinking about London what I think or say is not about that image and would be manifest nonsense if it were. It makes sense because it is not about my own mental pictures but about the real London outside of my imagination of which no one can have an adequate mental picture at all. Or again when we say that the sun is 90 odd million miles away we understand perfectly clearly that what we mean by this number we can divide and multiply it by other numbers and we can work out how long it would take to travel that distance at any given speed. But this is clearly thinking but this clear thinking is accompanied by imagining which is ludicrously false to which we know that the reality must be. In other words thinking about 90 million miles you can just think about the number you think oh that's a long ways but who of us has an experience of 90 million miles? None of us. To think then is one thing to imagine is another. Now think about what he means by that. Think about multiplying up to 90 million miles calculating all of that but to imagine is another. What we think or say can be and usually is quite different from what we imagine or picture and what may be true when the mental images that accompany it are entirely false. It is indeed doubtful whether anyone except an extreme visualist who is also a trained artist even has mental images which are particularly like the things he is thinking about. In these examples the mental image is not only unlike the reality it is known to be unlike at least after a moment's reflection. I know that London is not merely Houston station. Let us now go on to a slightly different predicament. Once I heard a lady tell her young daughter that that you would die if you ate too many tablets of aspirin. But why ask the child it isn't poisonous? How do you know it isn't poisonous said the mother? Because said the child when you crush an aspirin tablet you don't find horrid red things inside. Clearly when the child thought of poison she had a mental picture of horrid red things just as I have a picture of Houston when I think of London. The difference is that whatever I know my image to be very unlike is that whereas I know my image to be very unlike the real London the child thought that poison was really red. To that extent she was mistaken but this does not mean that everything she thought or said about poison is clearly nonsensical. She knew perfectly well that a poison was something which killed you and and made you ill if you swallowed it and she knew to some extent which of the substances in her mother's house were poisonous. If a visitor to that house had been warned by the child don't drink that mother said it's poison she would have been ill advised to neglect the warning on the ground that this child has a primitive idea of poison as hard red things which my adult scientific knowledge has long since refuted. In other words the child knows more than she knows but the child also knows less than she knows and whereas the child's picture of poison might not be terribly true the child might in fact be able to make some points and a visit to the house might very well say listen to the child because the child knows something. We can now add to our previous statement that's what that which may sound where the images that accompany it are false the further statement thinking may be sound in certain aspects whereas it accompanies not only by false statements but by false images mistaken for true ones. In other words this is where you sort of get into Brett Weinstein's metaphorical truth because well Jesus is sitting at the right hand of God the Father. Jesus the Son of God is sitting at the right hand of God the Father. There are aspects of that image that Christianity has never intended and quite obviously so that almost every Christian could imagine but there's something about that language which communicates other things which are really rather essential and are probably about the only way and in fact the best way you can communicate those things but what exactly are those things because it's sort of like asking I mean John Vervecki talked about these hyper objects what is an election we kind of know what an election is and we know how to act during an election and we know what an election is about but where does election live and suddenly we get very platonist because well is it the form of an election? There's still a third situation to be dealt with with our two previous examples we had been concerned with thought and imagination but not with language. I had a picture of Houston station but I did not need to mention it. The child thought that poison was hard red things but she could talk about poison without saying so but very often when we are talking about something which is not perceptible to the five senses as we use words which on one of these meanings refer to things or actions that are when a man says that he grasps an argument he is using a verb grasp which literally means to take something into the hands but he's certainly not thinking that that his mind has hands or that the argument can be seized like a gun. To avoid the word grasp he may change the form of expression to say I see your point but he does not mean that there's a pointed object has appeared in his visual field. He may have a third shot and say I follow you but he does not mean that he is walking behind you along the road. Everyone is familiar with this linguistic phenomenon and the grammarians call it metaphor but it is serious but it is a serious mistake to think that metaphor is an optional thing with poets and that poets and orators may put their work as decoration and plain speakers can do without. Okay what is an election? Well when I see people going in a line into that school well usually they're just going to school how do you know that they're going into election? Well there's more adults okay you very quickly see what I mean it's an election well what is an election? What are we doing? We're electing oh we're choosing and it just goes on and on from there. The truth is that if we are going to talk about things which are not perceived by the senses we are forced to use language metaphorically. Books on psychology or economics or politics are continuously metaphorical as books as poetry as books of poetry or devotion. There is no other way of talking as every philologist is aware. Again Lewis's good friend J.R.R. Tolkien was a philologist. Those who wish can satisfy themselves on the point by reading the books I've mentioned already and other books to which the two will lead them on. It is the study of a lifetime and I must here content myself with the mere statements all speech about supersensibles is and must be metaphorical in the highest degree. We now have three guiding principles before us. One that though that thought is distinct from the imagination which accompanies it. Two that thought may be in the main sound even when false images that accompany it are mistaken by the thinker for true ones. And again you know pushing past Lewis a little bit here the father the son sits at the right hand of the father in heaven. That's very logical to imagine a tiered universe and a sky palace and a decorated chair and someone sitting in it. There are ideas behind those pictures that just like in a sense seeing your parents relate to one another. There are so many ideas behind those pictures that in some ways the pictures are better communication better tools of communicating the ideas than if you try to take the ideas out of the picture and write them all down. Okay that's how images work and that's how we work with images. Three that anyone who talks about things that cannot be seen or touched or heard or the like must inevitably talk as if they could be seen or touched or heard. For example must talk about complexes or repressions as if desires could really be tied up in bundles or shoved back or of growth and development as if institutions could really grow like trees or unfold like flowers of energy being released as if it were an animal led out of a cage. And again we use these words and we don't think about them as metaphorical extrapolations of a very sensible world we live in because we're just so used to using them in that way. These words are very sloshy. Let us now apply this to the savage or the primitive articles of the Christian creed and let us admit at once that many Christians though by no means all when they make these assertions do have in mind just those crude and mental pictures which are so horrifying to the skeptic. When they say that Christ came down from heaven they do have a vague image of someone floating or shooting or floating downwards out of the sky. When they say that Christ is the son of the father they may have a picture of two human forms one looking rather older than the other. But we now know that the mere presence of these mental pictures does not of itself tell us anything about the reasonableness or absurdity of the thoughts they accompany. If absurd images if absurd images meant absurd thoughts then we should all be thinking nonsense all the time. And think about that if absurd images meant observes thoughts I grasp your idea. That's an absurd image but it's not an absurd thought. The Christians themselves make it clear that the father that the images are not to be identified with the things believed. They're related and associated though. They may picture the father as a human form but they also maintain that he has no body. They may picture him older than the son but they also maintain the one did not exist before the other both having existed from all eternity. I am speaking of course about Christian adults. Christianity is not to be judged from the fancies of children any more than medicine from the ideas of little girls who believe in horrid red things. At this stage I must turn aside to deal with a rather simple minded illusion. When we point out that the Christians mean is not to be identified with their mental pictures some people say in that case would it not be better to get rid of the mental pictures and of the language which suggests they do so all together. And I think in some ways that's what Carl Benjamin is looking for. Let's get rid of all these stories. Well okay well now we've learned that well the mythology is important so let's keep the mythology but let's just really insist on people keeping it mythological and keep reminding so they can keep divorcing this stuff. Well okay so then you know really beat up on the the people who got upset by the fact that I said when I read Genesis 1 it's sort of a table and a bowl and water above and water below and you know they really bristle at that and I should be really upset with them and try to train them whereas I think no leave them alone they'll be fine. So the idea is well let's get rid of all those other mental images and just have the pure thing but this is impossible. The people who recommend it have not noticed that when we try to get rid of manlike or as we would call anthropomorphic images they merely succeed in substituting images of some other kind. I don't believe in a personal god says one but I believe in a great spiritual force and again I often jump in and say please tell me what you mean by spiritual. Well you know no I don't know explain it to me and then suddenly they realize they don't know either or have just been using this word and just had some ideas in our mind about what it meant and didn't mean but we're sort of vague on the whole thing. I don't believe in a personal god but I do believe in a great spiritual force. What he has not noticed is that the word force has led in all sorts of other images about winds and tides and electricity and gravitation. I don't believe in a personal god says another but I do believe we are but I do believe we are all parts of one great being capital B which moves and works through us all. Not noticing that he has merely exchanged the idea of fatherly or royal looking man with the image of some widely extended gas or fluid. A girl I knew was brought up with higher thinking parents to regard god as a perfect substance. In later life she realized that this had actually led her to think of him as someone like a vast tapioca pudding. To make matters worse she disliked tapioca. We may feel ourselves quite safe from this degree of absurdity but we are mistaken. If a man watches his own mind I believe he will find that what he will find that what profess to be specifically advanced or philosophical conceptions of god are in his thinking always accompanied by vague images which if inspected would turn out to be even more absurd than the man-like images aroused by Christian theology. In other words well there's something much deeper going on behind that which Lewis will get to and I don't know if I'll have time to read the whole thing because these ideas of a man and people sort of impinge on us in ways that fluids and forces and all these other things we can sort of leave out there in the ocean unless of course we are really in the ocean hence we get back to Charles Taylor's buffered self. For man after all is the highest of things we meet in a sensuous environment he has at least conquered the globe honored though not followed virtue achieved knowledge made poetry music and art Jordan Peterson makes this point all the time humanity is the most complex thing you're going to meet a human being no doubt we are unspeakably different from him to which to that extent all man-like images are false but those images of shapeless mists and irrational forces forces which unaccompanied haunt the mind when we think we are rising to the conception of the impersonal or absolute being must be very much more so for images of the one kind or another will come we cannot jump off for images of one kind of another will come we cannot jump off our own shadow in other words what happens and we think of the force well why do we really like thinking about the force because I am more complex than the force and even if you imagine that human agency is an illusion or human agency is somehow emergent from all of these properties this force inside of me which is me is more complex than the water so I can go to the bathtub and move the water why do I want to imagine God as a force so I can wield him just like I wield water or I wield air by blowing it out of my mouth maybe that's why I want God to be impersonal as far then as the adult Christian of modern times is concerned the absurdity of the images does not imply absurdity of the doctrines but it may be asked whether the early Christian was in the same position perhaps he misstood the images mistook the images for true ones and really believed in a sky palace or the decorated chair but as we have seen from the example of the horrid red things even this would not necessarily invalidate everything that he thought of on these subjects the child in our example might know many truths about poison and even in some particular cases truths which a given adult might not know if you go into the child's house and then the child says don't do this because it's bad the wise adult would stop and listen they might ask the child some questions why is that bad because mommy said so well is what kind of person is mommy suddenly you get into that realm we can suppose a Galilean peasant who thought that Christ had literally and physically sat down at the right hand of the father if such a man well and you know well we can take a chariot up into the sky and find him so then suddenly when you have airplanes or rockets we go up into the sky and say ha no god they were all wrong well that's exactly the point that lewis is is wrestling with here if such a man had then gone to alexandria and had a philosophical education he would have discovered that the father had no right hand and did not sit at the throne it is conceivable that he would regard this and many as making any it is conceivable that he would regard this as making any difference to what he had really intended and valued in the doctrine during the days of his naivete for unless we suppose him to have not only a peasant to be not only a peasant but a fool which are two very different things physical details about a supposed celestial throne room would not have been what he cared about what mattered and this is exactly it well jesus sits at the right hand of the father read the opening the book of revelation well he's holding these seven stars in his hand what does that mean you have to understand what they assume the seven stars to mean and he holds um seven lampstands what does that mean in other words you have all of these pictures what do the pictures mean and what do we care about well if jesus holds the seven stars and i pray to jesus and i have some assurance he can listen to my prayers the room is incidental because what i really compare about what i really care about is and i have to use other metaphors control over the events of my life the very physical events of my life what matters must have been the belief that a person whom he had known as a man in palestine had as a person survived death and was now operating as the supreme agent of the supernatural being who governed and maintained the whole field of reality and now again even in lewis's sentence the whole field of reality all those words you can't get away from these super sensibles using words like this and that belief would survive substantially unchanged after the falsity of the earlier images had been recognized even if it could be shown then that the early christians accepted their imagery literally this would not mean that we are justified in relegating their doctrines as as a whole to the lumber room i don't know what a lumber room is but i can imagine whether they at whether they actually did is another matter the difficulty here is that they were not writing as philosophers to satisfy speculative curiosity about the nature of god in the universe they believed in god and for p knowledge they believed in god and once a man does that philosophical definite definiteness can never be the first necessity a drowning man does not analyze the rope that has flung to him or an impassioned lover another chemist consider the chemistry of his mistress's complexion hence the sort of question we are now considering is never raised by the new testament writers when once it is raised christianity decides quite clearly that the naive images are false the sect in the egyptian desert with which thought that god was like a man is condemned the desert monk who felt he had lost something by the correction is recognized as muddle-headed all three persons of the trinity are declared incomprehensible god is pronounced inexpressible unthinkable invisible to all created beings the second person is not only body body the second person is not only bodiless but also unlike man that if self um that if self revelation had been his sole purpose he would not have been chosen to be incarnate in human form we do not find similar statements in the new testament because the issue was not yet been made explicit but we do find statements which make it certain how that issue will be decided when once it becomes explicit the title son may sound primitive or naive but already in the new testament this son is identified with the discourse or reason or word logos which has eternally with god and yet also was god he is the all-pervasive principle of concretion or cohesion whereby the universe holds together all things and specifically life arose within him and within him all things will reach their conclusion the final statement of which he has been trying to express it is of course always possible to imagine an earlier stratum of christianity from which such ideas were absent just as it is always possible to say that anything you dislike in shakespeare was put in by an adapter and the original play free front and the original play free from it but what such assumptions but what do some such assumptions to do with serious inquiry and here the fabrication of them is specifically perverse since even if we go back to christianity into judaism itself we shall not find the unambiguous anthropomorphisms or man likeness we are looking for neither I admit shall we find its denial we shall find on the other hand god pictured as living above in the high and holy place we shall find on the other hand do I not fill heaven and earth sayeth the lord we shall find that in the ezekiel's vision god appeared notice the hesitating words and the appearance of man but we shall also find the warning take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves for ye saw no matter of similitude on the day that the lord spake unto you and horrib out of the midst of the fire lest ye corrupt yourselves and make a graven image most baffling of all to the modern literalist the god who seems to live locally in the sky also made it he's agent and arena the reason why the modern literalist is puzzled is that he is trying to get out of the old writers something which is not there starting from a clear modern distinction between material and immaterial he tries to find out which side of that distinction the ancient hebrew conception fell he forgets that the distinction itself has been made clear only by later thought we are often told that primitive man could not conceive pure spirit but then neither could he conceive mere matter a throne and a local habitation are attributed to god only at the state only at the stage when it is still impossible to regard the throne or palace even of an earthly king as a merely physical object physical object in other words and this you'll find if you go to the egyptian tombs we're thinking these are merely physical objects they didn't think that way well what does that mean well the distinction comes later well how can i think like they did you might not be able to exactly in earthly thrones and palaces was the spiritual significance okay and what do you what does he mean there by spiritual what is sort of at the core of the significance but you can't just have the core it's got to somehow be embodied some way either in the metaphor and language or or some other or some other means as we would say um as we would say the atmosphere that mattered to the ancient mind as soon as the contrast of spiritual and material was before their minds they knew god would be spiritual and realized that their religion had implied this all along but at an earlier stage that contrast was not there to regard that earlier stage as unspiritual because we find that there's no clear assertion of unembodied spirits this is a real misunderstanding you might just as well call it spiritual because it contains no clear consciousness of mere matter mr barfield has shown as regards the history of language that words did not start by referring merely to physical objects and then to get extended by metaphor to refer to emotions mental states and the like and this is of course what we think why do we think that way we're materialists what barfield showed is that in fact spirit and wind was the same word and we think well how does that well the distinction came later and so the fork comes later and so when we start looking back over history and we find the fork we can't get beyond it because we're stuck because we can't think like them and so what's the most reasonable way to proceed go with the words that they've been given now so then you get to tom hollands i'm leaning into the story well that's exactly the right thing to do on the contrary what we now call the literal and metaphorical meanings have both been disengaged by analysis from an ancient unity of meaning which was neither or both in the same way it's quite erroneous to think that man started with the material god or heaven and gradually spiritualized them that makes absolutely no sense he could not have started with something material for the material as we understand it comes to be realized only by contrast with the immaterial and the two sides of the contrast grow at the same speed he started with something which was neither and both as long as we are trying to read back into that ancient unity either the one or the other of the two opposites which have been analyzed out of it we shall misread all early literature and ignore many states of consciousness which we ourselves still in time from time experience the point is crucial not only for the present discussion but for any sound literary criticism or philosophy the christian doctrines and even the jewish doctrines which preceded them have always been statements about spiritual reality and again he's using that word now in our in our context and people are going to get muddied in it because they're going to hear spiritual as opposed to material but remember it's all one thing for them not specimens of primitive physical science whereas whatever is possible is positive in the conception of the spiritual has always been contained in them it is only its negative aspect immateriality which has had to wait for the recognition until abstract thought was fully developed the material imagery was never to be taken literally by anyone who had this who had reached the stage when he could understand what by taking it literally meant in other words the fork in the road came later see what i'm using here see how i'm trying to articulate this super sensible it's a fork in the road well show me the road get it and now we come to the difference between explaining and explaining away it shows itself in two ways one some people when they say that a thing is meant metaphorically conclude that this is conclude from this that it is hardly meant at all they wrongly think that christ spoke metaphorically when he told us to carry the cross they wrongly conclude that carrying the cross meant nothing more than leading a respectable life and subscribing moderately and subscribing moderately to charities they reasonably think that hellfire is a metaphor and unwisely conclude that it means nothing more serious than remorse they say that the story of the fall in genesis is not literal and then go on to say i have heard them myself that it is really a fall upwards which is like saying that because my heart is broken contains a metaphor it therefore means i feel myself cheerful this mode of interpretation i regard frankly as nonsense for me the christian doctrines which are metaphorical or which have become metaphorical with the increase of abstract thought means something which is just as supernatural or shocking after we have removed the ancient imagery as it was before they mean that in addition to the physical or psychophysical universe known to the sciences there creates an uncreated and unconditioned reality which caused the universe to be that this reality has a positive structure or or constitution which is useful though doubtless not completed described in the doctrine of the trinity and that this reality at a definite point in time entered the universe we know by becoming one of its own creatures and their produced effects on the historical level which the normal workings of the natural universe do not produce and that this has brought about a change in our relations to the unconditioned reality in many ways if you hear what jonathan peugeot talked about in terms of his patterns lewis basically says the same thing right there it would be noticed that our colorless entering the universe is not a wit less metaphorical than the more picturesque came down from heaven we have only substituted a picture of horizontal or unspecified motion for one of vertical movement and every attempt to improve the ancient language will have the same result these things not only cannot be asserted they cannot even be presented for discussion without metaphor we can make our speech duller we cannot make it more literal these comments concern two things the supernatural unconditioned reality and those events on the historical level which its eruption into the natural universe is held to have produced the first thing is indescribable in literal speech and therefore we rightly interpret all that is said about it metaphorically but the second thing is a wholly different position events on the historical level are the sort of things we can talk about literally if they concurred they have they are perceived by the senses of men legitimate exclamation degenerates into muddled or dishonest explaining away as soon as we start applying to these events the metaphorical interpretations which we rightly apply to the statements about god in other words well the resurrection is a metaphor well the difference between the resurrection is a metaphor and jesus walked out of the tomb and thomas touched his side and his hands there's a big difference there the assertion that god has a son was never intended to mean that he is that that he is a being propagating his kind bisexual intercourse hence we don't have god the mother it gets complicated okay mary incarnation yeah yeah yeah but it's not god's up there father mother having a son and now the son comes down and you need the mother to get the son in order to do that that's again is sort of louis's point about picture thinking but the assertion that jesus turned water into wine was meant perfectly literally for this refers to something which if it happened as well as within the set um as well within the reach of our senses and our language when i said my heart is broken you know perfectly well that i don't mean anything you could verify at a post mortem but when i say my bootlace is broken then if your own observation shows it to be intact i'm either lying or mistaken the accounts of the miracles in the first century palestine are either lies or legends or history if at all or the most important of them are lies or legends then the claims about which christianity has been making for the last two thousand years are simply false no doubt it might even so can might even so contain noble sentiments and moral truths so does greek mythology so does norse but that is a different affair nothing in this chapter helps us helps us to the helps us to a decision about the probability or improbability of christian claim we are merely removed a misunderstanding in order to secure that um for a that for that question for a fair hearing so you can continue reading the books and sorry i don't always read that well but the point i want to get at through this chapter is this talk about metaphor we need to up our resolution on it and and think about what is going on now someone like carl benjamin will look at perhaps these stories and say well i don't believe they really happened well what do you mean by really well there's a lot going on here a lot more than meets the eye for a lot of people you can't talk about super sensible super sensible or spiritual or almost anything else without metaphor skeptics get tripped up in the given metaphors but they can't avoid them either christianity is dependent upon miracle in a way other religions are not and we're sort of stuck here because we have no other language now what peugeot really basically says is the patterns lay themselves out and so really what jonathan does is sort of illuminate these patterns and bring them forward and he gets a hearing when he begins laying them out and people begin realizing oh yeah these patterns do flow out you have to sleep you'd better learn to love you are anxious about the future of the world you need to learn to forgive your enemies and you might even lose or die at their hands the patterns lay themselves out now here's the thing about the history part when we say well we trust in god or we believe in god we expect it to have payout in the historical world if it has no payout in the historical world then it's not true part of why people doubt christianity is because sometimes it doesn't seem to work and that's really in many ways what the issue with church is people who go to church believe it works people who don't go to church don't believe it works or sometimes believe it works now you get back to back to verveckis claim that well just in general being embedded in a wisdom tradition works okay and so then you have the one gentleman say well which tradition my father was muslim and my mother was christian and peugeot sort of says well read both characters who do you want to be like well what will it mean in order to become like him and again i bump into this regularly in conversation with people and i say you're going to have to live into it well why because in a sense you have to take all of this spiritual stuff and bring it into your life well then i'm going to have to really believe it yeah but that's the point you have to live into it you have to live into the patterns you have to see the patterns and start living them out now if you listen to peugeot enough you'll realize there's a lot of patterns and they're very complex and wisdom is about figuring out which pattern am i actually dealing with right now and what is good and what is evil and and what should i strive for the patterns lay themselves out how will you endure the sufferings of life that's peterson's formulation of it the patterns lay themselves out so again the reason for the church well because he can't do this abstractly not only do you need metaphor in order to grasp it which is why tom holland is leaning into the story but you need a context in which to pursue it how does one do that you can't do it alone you can't just do it in your imagination you have to live into it well it's not just one thing and again if you go back to these three points well it's good for the world well i'm enough of a classical liberal okay well there's your religion well it's vital for my participation in the age to come it's it's it's vital for me escaping heaven and hell well that tends to reduce down to well what's the one thing i need to do and that's what's happened in evangelicals believe in jesus in my heart so i don't need to go to church because i already believe in jesus in my heart it's already in my head a very protestant approach so i believe i'm going to go to hell when i heaven when i die because i believe in jesus well why bother going to church church is an add-on well except it's good for me well what's good well it's the good i need why because i find reciprocal narrowing when i'm away from it and i find reciprocal broadening and the people around me are listening to me and and and well how are you going to get at it well i'm going to have to listen to the stories because it's in the stories that actually at a very deep level it all begins to build up in me well they're only stories there's not a sky palace well there's something that the sky palace is describing symbolically well how can i interact with it well you're probably going to interact with it in the symbolic world oh you mean jonathan bichot's world well is his symbolic world is pointing to that world well what if i don't believe jesus rose from the dead okay well fair enough probably most of us don't believe that as much as we should because this believing thing is also kind of complex at that the believing language is sort of getting a grapple a handle on a handle on so yeah but that's what the church is for and finally you're only going to go to it if you really believe it's doing any good so i'm out of time hope this was helpful we'll see i'll post it tomorrow