https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=XcKgnfyhHKQ

 Because when in doubt, I'd rather record because then sometimes interesting things happen and they're lost. Very true, very true. So I bugged you a couple months ago, I think, about that. You shared an article in The Times about people converting to Catholicism. And the sort of the frame that The New York Times had put it in was this like, what a mysterious thing that, you know, people do this conversion to Catholicism thing. It was just like, I don't know how to describe, like, I always look for metaphors, which I don't necessarily think is the best way to communicate the feeling of like what I get from this sort of stuff. But yesterday I was walking around Navy Yard in Brooklyn and they have this really massive old like, it's not a battleship, but that kind of old like gray World War II airship. Just like seeing that massive gray thing, whole 100% gray, it looks so otherworldly, right? And it's like, wow, there are people who spend every day of their lives on that kind of ship and like see it all the time. And to them, it's home. And for me, you know, it's two miles from my place. But when I see it, it's shocking and like just looks so alien, you know? And that article is written about these people converting to these like Orthodox faiths or specifically in this case Catholicism as this like otherworldly kind of how could I don't they just there's no way they can understand. So you posted it. I was like, I've been thinking a lot about that concept. The longer I, you know, you live where I didn't grow up here and now I live here and you kind of get another perspective of the world. And I sort of drop hints like in conversation with people trying to understand how like my new colleagues see the world, right? Like secular Jews and Jews who go to temple and, you know, but there's a lot of those folks that I work with in New York, but there's also a lot of like, you know, mainliners, Northeasterners who aren't necessarily like churchgoers, but and who I'd assumed had fallen into sort of this, you know, the track of the last 50 years kind of thing and move away from the church passively. And, you know, they kind of have this progression of braces, liberation of view and all that stuff. And then they, you know, one day you just wake up and you never go to church and you kind of have swallowed a whole other world view, you know? And when I kind of drop it in conversation to kind of get an idea of like, so what is, what do you think the world is? Like where are you going? Where did you come from? Like what's like, what's good? What's bad? When you use the term moral or evil or like, what are all these, what are these words mean? Most of them eventually, like it's, well, first of all, it's obvious in there in the way that they respond that they don't generally have those kinds of conversations and they don't generally think about those kinds of things. And I think it reminded me of like, yeah, most people are spending most of their days listening to or reading or like doing all this stuff. Like most people just have lives, right? Like good for them. I wish I could be one of those folks who don't think about it. So that's one reason I think why the New York Times doesn't understand why people would adopt a traditional religion with like liturgy and old school buildings and stuff, right? And there's a whole other bunch of political reasons. But like the more I talk to these people, like if you ask direct questions to, I don't know what you're, I guess the thing I wanted to ask is like, well, there are a bunch of things I want to ask, but the first thing about this specific article is like when you talk to people, not necessarily at church, at your church or, you know, maybe when you talk to them online or maybe if you reach out to you or wherever you are, who aren't Christians who don't go to church every day or every week or whatever. And we're not like thinking about this stuff all the time. What like, what do you find? What are the passive explanations for what, where they think they're going and what they think the world is like? Do you like, do you have an idea for in your world, how people are responding to that who aren't in this bubble of people who are watching YouTube videos? You mean normal people? Yeah. Well, first of all, it's always important to remember there are no normal people in that all there are are groups, groups of massive intersectionalities out there and the aspect with which you try to, you know, for example, I just, I just on Twitter posted the data, the distributist just posted a piece from the Washington Post, which had an LGBT piece about, well, did we want equality or liberation? And then someone tweeted back to me saying, well, but that doesn't respect, that doesn't represent LGBT people. And I said, you know, but outside of, let's say an organized group that actually has some sort of confessional structure to it that says like the NRA, we believe in gun rights. Well, there you go. There you have a group and you can number them and identify them. Generally speaking, the groups we identify are created in a sense by the filter that we are mapping onto the population. And so you'll get specifics, you'll get individual specifics for different groups, but they're not really, as we love to say in our culture, a community because a community actually has hierarchy, cohesion, identity, that, you know, a life to it. So when I talk to people, and those are the kind of questions I'm always interested in and I always ask, you just get this huge range, a lot of people. And so then you have these religious that are actual communities like churches. But as you well know, within churches, you've got a lot of people who, let's say, perhaps were brought up within a religion, who, for the most part, they're not even, they don't think much about their religion. They are certain, certain, certain language that they've adopted answers to certain things. But they also sort of live their life, not unlike other groups that don't have that religious overlay. I mean, it's just incredibly complex. And you know, having grown up in the New York, New Jersey area, and I haven't been there for a long time. But you know, it was, New Jersey was just a patchwork of things. So then you obviously in Patterson, you sort of had racialized ghettos, which it wasn't just race. There were usually immigration patterns, like the Dutch Calvinists had their own little ghettos. Prospect Park used to be a ghetto for Dutch Calvinists, and they moved out to Haldane and North Haldane and Wyckoff and Midland Park. You know, so it's this massive thing. I think another element of this, though, is age. Because one of the things that I've noticed is that when people are in their 20s, they're so often just really a product of whatever little bubble of formation went running their way. And at some point in late teens or 20s, maybe, but maybe not until their 30s, 40s, 50s or ever, they begin to individuate a little bit from their pack. You look at high school kids, you know, they're all being individuals in exactly the same way. And I think that part of that is just youth. So you get to a place like New York City. And well, it's always important to remember, especially a place like New York City, where a lot of people come there, that coming there and the reasons they came there is part of the sample. There's some filter that everybody got caught in that brought us here. That's right. That's right. Especially for New York, it's often an economic filter or a social filter. You know, I look at my kids as they watch. For a while, I watched my kids watch The Office. And then for a while, I mean, really watching on Netflix, the way we couldn't, I couldn't watch when I was a kid because you didn't have, you just had what was on ABC, NBC or CBS or PBS or New York City, Channel 11 or Channel 9 or Channel 5, whatever. But so I watched my kids watch The Office. And then they watch Friends and I watched them just imbibing Friends. And I think, huh, that's interesting. And now one of my daughters lately has been has been imbibing Gossip Girl, which I knew nothing about, which is the show from the middle of the aughts, which is just this crazy soap opera show of glitz and beauty. And it's like, wow. And so I watched this and you just see young people formed into this stuff. But once they get out there in the world, you know, it's so funny because they've all got the same answer. Diversity. They're they're highly undiverse when it comes to the for the value of diversity. But you just watch people. But as they go out into the world, they'll continue to bump into life things. And it's it's like I was talking to Karen a couple of weeks ago. You know, it's it's suddenly when you hit chaos, these things that you can't predict that they everyone's continues to differentiate as they age. So there's maybe a way too complex question to answer. No, no. So that's how I've been thinking about it as well. Right. So you kind of like you land on these waves and then you're like you get caught up in something that you don't even realize you've begun seeing the world in a way that you've imbibed from the from like the media you you intake of the people you're in, whatever all these different things. And like and you don't it's not like people walk around thinking only one thing about a subject like I got in a fight, not fight, like a discussion. Call it at a small group the other week. The content was like at your church small group. Yeah. Sorry. Yes. Can. Generosity be commanded. And so my my thing was like. And I for some reason, I'm very militant about this concept in my life. Like 100 percent. Yes. Like it depends what you mean by command, I suppose. But like 100, you can command anything. Right. Like but our culture and the culture of everyone in the room is so interesting. Like they all had all assumed before I said anything, no, generosity is like something that you have a feeling and then you do something right. But it has to be. Expressive. Right. Right. It's exactly it's tied to a thing that you feel. It cannot therefore be commanded. And I was like, that's the dumbest thing I've ever heard. Like I don't believe that at all. That doesn't make any sense. Like I could like I used an example like that someone in the group had they had these two bikes lying around that they weren't using anymore. So they gave them without charging to some younger couple in the group who wanted to have bicycles who were from that itself. And they were like, so on. So I explained like, so what happened was very generous of you to have given the bikes and not put them on eBay. Right. But on Tuesday, you said, yes, I'll give them all. You can totally have the bikes. And then throughout the week until Saturday, when they come to pick them up, you could have any number of emotions about whether or not you wanted to give them the bike. And you could be conflicted about it. And then by the time Saturday rolls around and they come to pick up the bikes, you're like, no, I don't really wish I had put it on eBay. I could really have used that like $400 or whatever for selling these couple of bikes. I'll do it anyway. Like now I'm obliged to do it by my own commitments and by the, you know, the idea that I wouldn't be an honorable person now if I didn't do it. So in a sense, it's become a commitment, your idea of a command, like a command punishment experience. Right. And but everybody in the room, by the end of it, by the end of the discussion that we've had, some of some people hated that idea because they hate the idea of having commands and rules, especially in church or in in church communities. They want no rules because they just want love and love and all that stuff. So there are all the ideas that people have that they've never had a discussion about. No one's ever pushed back on the idea that Christianity and Christian churches have to be expressive in nature only. There can be no restrictions. And there are reasons for that that have to do with people's experiences like, you know, they had bad people made them feel guilty all the time growing up. So they hate the idea of feeling guilty and they don't want church to be like that. They want it to be something that they wanted. All these other things. Right. But in general, this idea that churches is there is a voluntary thing. It's like something that you're always opting into and there's no rigid structure that you have to come and submit yourself to. That's like that's so a part of what the culture is right now. Right. And people don't or this idea that like when when, you know, heaven is this ethereal thing and there's no resurrection of the body. Like that idea, I think, is also really interesting that I don't know anybody who believes in the resurrection of the body who didn't go to seminary. Right. Like, but it's really interesting that people get these ideas and just like live them forever. And until maybe someone pushes back on them. But even then, generally, they're not going to just change their mind because they've had this idea and they've lived it for so long and they didn't get it through an argument. I'm not saying everyone's irrational. I'm just saying like, you may not even know all those ideas because, like I say, you have different ideas in different moments when you need to employ this idea. And then a conflicting idea is more useful on Thursday than it is on Tuesday. So you employ a different idea or like when you have a daughter, there's a ton of rules that the daughter needs to follow for every other aspect of your life. Everything needs to be expressive and felt. And like, anyway, it was just so that people you have this tool box that you're constantly adding to of ideas that are good for certain things. And then getting through a church conversation is like a one place where you use different ideas. And so I kind of go in all the way to a place here, but it was so interesting. I think it's so interesting. Like the week before that, it was several weeks on generosity consecutively. And this thing was like when one of the Levitical laws, I think it is, but for the rule for Israel, don't like every seventh year, leave your field free for the poor people or widows and orphans and stuff to use the field to like be able to eat. And or like, don't take like leave the corners of your prop to like the people, whatever, some sort of like passive on this program to the people who need it. And the first person who spoke and no shame again on these people who have the I do this all the time, I'm sure, obviously, to how people work. But he was like, you know, this is so interesting. We're like sitting in this Upper West Side apartment. Very nice. Everybody in the room makes lots of money. And this guy says, you know, it's so interesting that this is in the Bible. Like I would have thought that generosity would be like the other way around. We would prioritize the poor people first and a second. I looked at I was in shock. I looked at him like. How generous of you, like how generous of you. What a what an interesting thing for you to say. And like, again, it's the idea that's I do. You know what I mean? That like I do know what you mean. And these things all the time that have no attachment to like, like, you don't live like that. How could you be upset that the Bible doesn't say that in Leviticus in the law? Like, it's not that passage in Leviticus is not every man for the rest of time ought to leave the corners of their fields for poor people. But it says Israel should live this way. It doesn't like there's inferences that you can take from it as a story and all that. But like, what a weird way for you to have, first of all, read this. Second of all, said something about this that I'm sure expresses what most people in the world today would say about this passage like, are we supposed to prioritize them first? And anyway, so like. I'm realizing more and more, I suppose, that. People's positions on stuff are revealed way more in. Like. In how they act or how they write or how they speak passively about things versus actively about things, right? So what is that? What is that New York Times piece about people can bring you to the policies we communicate about the author? They think converting to religion, especially traditional religion, is a shocking alternative from the true nature of the path of human civilization and where it's going. What is the guy? Everyone's saying that they don't think you can command generosity. What does that mean? That means that people think that you have to say that everything is expressive, that there shouldn't be any rules that you can break and get punished for breaking. And they don't like all rules are bad. And you're always going to react against the idea of rules, especially in church communities, right? Like there are these things that people believe. And like you kind of have to infer it from what they're saying and doing. But you can't just listen to like the statements that people are making necessarily, because those statements are like conditioned experiences that they're regurgitating because it's like liturgy, right? It's like when you go and you can in a capitulation, when you kneel down and you pray, you do the thing like that. That's that's what people are doing when they're making a lot of these like affirmative statements, right? Because they're rehearsed. They they they know the story. They know the pattern. They know like they're in the thing. And so the conclusion that I drew from all of this experience is I had recently after having thought about it, everything in my life, I've been thinking about a few that lines recently, thinking about how I'm like a epistemology, the postmology that Christianity teaches us. Or that our church teaches us, Christianity has is so unclear to me. Like I don't know if you saw Esther tweeted like last week or two weeks ago, like someone first of all, I love Esther's Twitter because there's like total stream of consciousness. There's like almost no like I never have to wonder what she's thinking about any topic. Bang. And then she'll like disagree with herself maybe a little while later. It's what I do. So it's fine. I love listening to it. So it was like, why don't you like presuppositional apologetics? And she and she responded like it's epistemologically bankrupt. Right. And so there's a moment of me that actually like I spend a lot of time in my it's so interesting talking about Frankie Schaefer and stuff like that. I remember the first time I talked to you, I was like, well, I, you know, I got really into French Schaefer when I was in high school and like learning that sort of path. And you had mentioned like, oh yeah, he was on the other side of the political divide. So I didn't really, you know, it wasn't my thing. And listening to you kind of go through that whole thing, like his cultural or presuppositional apologetic thing, like that comes from that tradition. I got really into that. And I do, I kind of agree with her. Like, I don't know, like I don't know what like, what, not necessarily apologetically, just like, if I want to be a Christian, if I'm believing the story, there are a million questions that I now have as an adult about what, I know what I don't have, what I'm not caring. I'm not at like a rationalist. I'm not all these things because Christianity had to defend itself from all of these critiques, but it defends itself by critiquing the critique very frequently, which is essentially what presuppositional is in this, right? Like it's a critique of the critique that you're receiving. But that's not very anti-fragile because now you don't really have a position that you know that you hold. And so like that, so everybody kind of trying to summarize, everybody has these passive ideas that they're just imbibing from the world around them and they don't even know that they hold them necessarily. And then they, they reveal themselves and betray their those ideas and the way that they act. And you can kind of observe it, but you never know for sure because you're approving them on Tuesday and not on every day of the week and every moment. There's all these filters that people live through all these different times. And when like it, it rose all these other questions in me that I hadn't really thought of before because you have this idea of what God is, what people mean when they say the word God in Christianity or like it's been driving me crazy for years now when people say like, Oh, just love Jesus and everything will be okay. Like that's such a nonsensical statements of people. If you don't understand what it means to love Jesus, right? You have to define that phrase or else it's useless. So like, but because the work we're on the back foot, it seems in all of the, like so many of my pastors that I have gone to the church like in Sydney, Sunday and Sunday pew, I it's so frustrated because they're defending themselves against the culture that continues to advance against it. But they're not, I don't know what they mean by those terms. I don't know. Like Jordan Peterson spent an hour and a half or two hours over there from defining what the Bible thought it went by God in that first Genesis thing. Right. But I've never heard a pastor do that. I've never heard like in church, a pastor talk about what we mean when we say God and how do we know that it's true? And it like, so you grow up with this idea that God is essentially a big one of us and, and like, is not like, what does it mean that God's not bounded by time or omnipotent? Like I remember learning all like the three omnis and like all these different things, but like that's omnipotent is kind of like a description for how he's not like us because we're limited and he's unlimited. Okay. But I, it's hard for me to understand what that means because that's just again, something that's describing how he's different from me, which okay, but like what is the character of God? And next we start to read the Bible and you get ideas of the character of God, but like metaphysically, what does that mean? Like what are the implications for that? And like all of these different things, I feel like, like the metaphysics of Christianity have seen a distinct, at least in my experience, lack of focus because we're so like this question does God exist? Doesn't seem to be anchored in anything real because it's this like, I think Jordan figures revealed it that we don't as Christians really know what we're saying when we say we believe God exists, right? Like we have these ideas, but from childhood, a lot of the time that a lot of people are leaving behind and we don't know how to deal with them going forward. And like, so I don't know. The point is I don't know what a Christian epistemology is. I honestly don't even know how I would explain it to people. I know what the Christian critique of other epistemologies is, but I don't know what the Christian epistemologies is. And then I don't know what, uh, like what we mean when we say like, okay, so I've been able to boil it down to this Christians say, I believe that Jesus is Lord, like that, you know, confess with your lips and believe in your heart and all that stuff. So I can believe that a man lived and died 2000 years ago, who was the incarnation of the creator of the universe, something not like us, something like something other, but also like us in many ways because he's our creator and made us in this image. Um, so we have some idea, but not a complete idea. Okay, fine. I'm happy to live with that. And I can believe that a man lived and died and told people and those people told more people. And we believe as a result of that faith that we have in that, you know, God inspired these good people who were obviously not perfect, but he gave them the message that they could then give to us. But that's not obviously going to be a satisfactory epistemology in the current, but any current conversation, because there's nothing that grounds it against any other statement that anyone else would make. And I've never actually heard anyone have that conversation because it just kind of close circuits the conversation, you know, like it, um, the Christian will say to the, to the, to the Christians or atheist type, your epistemology is completely corrupt and it doesn't, it's founded on like you're shooting yourself in the foot with your rationalism and your, and your empiricism and your materialism. And it actually doesn't end up making sense. I completely agree with that perspective, but then the, the response is obvious. Why do you believe this one and not anything else that anyone else has told you? And then the Christian constantly just sort of says, well, I remember distinctly Douglas Wilson saying this in a debate with Christopher patients. I believe it because my mom and dad loved me and they told me and they brought me up to nurture and admission of the Lord. Well, that's not very helpful if your parents didn't, didn't do that. Right. Or that's not very helpful from a philosophical perspective. So like, I'm curious, like in your time, having all these conversations now online, like has anyone ever pushed you on this? Like, what is the Christian epistemology? What is the Christian idea of God? Can you explain it to me in American English? Like, like maybe philosophical American English, but can you explain how like I D in an ideal, like in the, in your vacuum, you know, sealed room, what the, how we use those terms as Christians and what we're actually striving toward? Like, what is our highest goal when it comes to that whole conversation? Cause I, maybe it's obvious and maybe it's happening all the time and I just haven't heard it, but I honestly don't know. And I feel like I'm paying attention. So anyway, you are paying attention and that's good. And I think you're exactly right. I think, I think the way a lot of churches are going right now, the way Christianity is going in the United States is something like this. People, people generally have a mental maps and routines and patterns that they have absorbed from their parents, their peers, the society around them, economic necessity, that which, that which gives us status, you know, we're very sensitive to that. And so we have all of these ways that we live. So you, you sort of have the elephant, the elephant and the rider here, cause that's, that's just a helpful in. So that's, that's the elephant. And that elephant is, is very practical, very routine oriented, very, you know, always watching the herd, trying to, you know, up its status in the herd, you know, living, that's what the elephant is doing. And you have the rider and some riders are grew up in Christian homes. And what happens at the level of the rider is sort of this language game where the rider associates what the elephant is doing, especially in their own herd, especially if you grew up in a church, your herd, the rider associates all of that language with what all the elephants are doing. So there you have the connection between the language and then the actions and, and they're all going around. Now, along the way, the riders in all of their talking basically got the idea that, well, you know, we riders, those elephants below us, they're really kind of dumb. They just kind of go about their business. We're really the ones calling the shots. We're really in charge and we're doing so on the basis of the stories and the language games that we're playing. And so the riders are all convinced of this. And so now you've of course got little sub herds, herds like Christians and churches, and you've got the much broader herd, which is enormously diverse like you, like you have in New York City. But once people get to New York City by virtue of lots and lots of different things, the geography of New York City, the culture of New York City that gets passed on and in fact, not just passed on, but actually instilled in each, in each coming group, you know, so the elephants very quick, very quickly assimilate to what they need to do to continue to live, let's say in New York City, but the riders, they're, they're, you know, especially if they had a pretty strong identity built up from the herd that they grew up in, they stick with their language game. And so a lot of what really happens in churches is that you have all of these webs of language and stories and rules at the rider level. Okay. And, and the way the riders continue to soothe the elephants that they're keeping their universe together. So in a sense, the rider's a little bit associated with heaven and the elephant's a little bit associated with earth because the rider's theoretical often, um, is you keep, you keep running this language game. So what happens when you go to church is it's, it's very, very important for the minister to continue to tell you all of the things that your animal, that your rider has always heard that, that Jesus is Lord, that, I mean, all of these sentences, you know, God and all of this stuff, but, but you're exactly right. Because what, what is happening now is that the, the riders, the, the, the Christian ride, especially you get to a place like New York City where, you know, what percentage of people go to church on a Sunday, it is pretty small. Yeah. And, and you're so outnumbered and that, that makes the elephants nervous. So, so at some point it looks like I might have someone at my door. We'll see if they knock. Um, so, so that makes, that makes all the elephants nervous and, and it's just standing, hang on a second. I'm going to see what's going on. Okay. Oh, I'm sorry. What we're saying is being recorded. So, so you're, you're going to have some music stuff. Oh, okay. Small church pastor. So, so I think you're exactly right in that. Thanks Pete. Um, I think you're exactly right in that this, this direct way that we think we live, we get these ideas in our head, we get a picture of the world and that's what we're going to do. That that that's not that that's far simplistic and often simply wrong about how we actually organize our lives. And, and so this language game that we play about God and Jesus and such, that that is, that is often fairly shallow. It takes actually quite a bit for that language game to get all the way down to where the elephant moves the elephant's feet. And when you poke at your small group Bible study, asking a question like, can generosity be commanded? You're dealing with that interaction because what you're really asking is, you know, how does the elephant work and what you stumble upon. And I love the way you said it. Um, you know, people's positions on stuff was revealed by how they act right or speak passively rather than actively. That is exactly right. Exactly right. Because people, and this gets into, so, you know, you know who burn power is. So I had this kind of, I've had a couple of conversations with burn power. He's over in Georgia, big guy. Um, when he first mentioned jockey, Lule's propaganda, it's like bang, lights went on because, so the writers have a lot of propaganda and that propaganda, again, if you read Jonathan Heights, the happiness hypothesis, the gossip, the propaganda, that's all really important for the herd and for the writers. The propaganda is, is what gives the writers a sense of control, a sense of wellbeing. And as long as we're echoing the propaganda back and forth to each other, we kind of know, okay, you and I are good together because the propaganda, you know, think about it, this is going to maybe tick some people off, but think about it in a marriage. You know, one person says, you know, I love you more than anything. The other person says, I love you more than anything. And as long as both people are saying, they love each other more than anything. But, but then again, you know, you're playing a video game and your wife's like, honey, I really like to like it when I go bed at the same time. Now you just go to bed. I'm going to keep playing my video game. I thought you loved her more than anything and now you're choosing the video game instead of going to bed with your wife. You know, so, and, but, but the propaganda is really important because it, it sort of is a signal to both sides that everything's okay. So in other words, the words are signaling things that aren't necessarily exactly what the words are. And so when you stop and say, now, wait a minute, when we use this little word, God, what on earth do we mean? You ask that in a Christian church and you'll, they won't be able to tell you. And if they work really hard, they might say something like you just said that God is just a big one of us. Now, if you actually say it that way to someone who has been to the seminary or Bible college, they'll say, no, no, that's not what it is at all. Yeah, but that's what we think. And, and that's what Sam Harris thinks. And so when Jordan Peterson in Vancouver one runs through his little litany about what God is and says all of these things and all the Christians are out there listening, it's like, that's not what I hear in church. And then Sam Harris basically says to him, that's not what they hear in church. And, and so what Peterson has basically done is is really taken things down a notch and opened it up and said, you know, we're using all these words. We might want to actually do some thinking about what's all going on with this. And, and so he says a few things that sound enough alike. A lot of the language games in church that a lot of people say, Oh, Oh, he's one of us. And that obviously the atheists hear that too, because, Oh, he's one of them. He's obviously really, he's one of these strange creatures like you that is asking uncomfortable questions. And now the thing is that, I mean, I just got an email yesterday from a guy who, you know, was going to church with his wife. And, you know, he's another one of these people that thinks about things. And he was, he basically was like, I don't believe in this Trinity stuff. And so it was an evangelical church. And so he went to the pastor and, well, I don't believe in the Trinity and boom, they excommunicated him. And it's like, it's like, okay, but you know, all of the, you know, all of these other things that you're probably looking the other way on, but here's a line and we have no idea what makes that line important necessarily. We have this theoretical idea with creeds and confessions and those things, but how it actually gets down to the elephant level and how it actually shapes the world and, and how any of this stuff works. Well, we don't have much of an idea at all. And we don't actually even like it when people stop and say, wait a minute, can we actually talk about this? Most of the people in church will not most of the people that may be unfair, but a lot of people in church will say, no, I don't want to talk about this. I just want to hear you say, I love you more than anything. And then we'll all be okay. So, and, and, and by saying it that way, I don't want to, I don't want to discount the important of I love you more than anything that that's actually a critical functional thing for the health of the community because there's a lot of stuff built into that community that when people step out of it. So the classic grew up in the church, you know, just see the language game. And at some point you say, what should this language game is? It's just, this is a load of crap. Then they go down into the world, but they also jettison all of the stuff at the elephant level that was actually keeping the community cohesive and whole and healthy. And then suddenly they go out into the world and their life is chaos. And so then what do they do? Well, they jump back, but they jump back in with the language game because that's what's associated with all of those other patterns of the elephant. So, you know, you're exactly right that this is way, way, way more complicated than any of us know, but it's a good thing we actually work with it without having to know that complexity because that's actually what keeps people alive. Because if you, if you didn't know how to live with, you know, Oh, I love you more than anything, that level of propaganda. Well, you couldn't live. And so now you have the problem of looking at that and saying, you know, it's not really working the way everyone else says it's working. Okay. So God exists. And that's why, and this pops up when you have all of these people who are living orderly, normal, moral lives that say God exists. And then you've got some of these people over here living orderly moral lives that say God doesn't exist. And actually they're living a lot like each other. And that then of course causes this language group a problem. And so whenever someone stumbles over here, they say, Aha. And whenever someone stumbles over here, this group says, Aha. But at the same time you realize, no, there's way, way, way more stuff going on. And so then when you read a book like Leviticus, what you actually see is that what's happening in a book like Leviticus is, is they're dealing with this connection between the covenant is very, yeah, don't, don't, you know, don't harvest the corners of your fields. Well, I have a rice farmer in my church. You know what? He harvests the corners of his field and the gleaners that actually go out in his field, they're not grabbing rice. You know what they're grabbing? Crawfish who are just kind of growing in the, in the, you know, it's, but then you read, don't, what, what do you mean by don't harvest the corners of your field? Well, given the cultural context, this is actually a statement about generosity. And as you noticed, uh, they're commanding generosity, but we Americans, another one of the games we're playing is this expressive individualism and actually this expressive individualism is another type of propaganda because people are all fine with expressive individualism. As long as everyone is expressing pretty much the same thing. When someone comes up and says, well, you know, I like to express, I don't know, walking around without pants. Well, so much for expressive individualism. You know, we're going to command you to wear pants because you know, nobody wants to see you walking around without pants. So, you know, and, and so even, even the, the culture that people have, they don't even know that. And that's why it's always so, so much fun to move to a different state, a different subculture, especially to a different country, maybe on the other side of the world. And then you get there and it's like, well, these people are doing very different things. And then you live there long enough and actually your elephant starts to adjust. So this is the missionary experience. So then when you go back to your own country, well, then suddenly it's like, well, now you have different perspectives on both worlds. That's a powerful thing. So no, you're, I loved, I loved your rant there. And I, I think you're dead on right. The challenge is, now you can stop and say, well, look at this. And everyone's like, now, wait a minute, we're playing the propaganda game. I love you more than anything. You better keep saying that. Cause if you stop saying that, we're going to put you out. Now the putting, see, and even someone says, well, I have a problem with the Trinity. Okay. Well, actually that is connected to stuff, but that's a really long connection. And so, and most churches, I really also liked how you said, many pastors are kind of on their back foot, especially in a place like New York. And they're just in a sense, always reacting. And what they're doing so often in a place like New York is they're helping, you know, okay, so New York is grabbing people from places like, you know, the Midwest fly over country and we need some place where they're going to have the language game there too. I can't live without my language game. Good. And then you pick up some other people who run into grave disorder and see all these people living fairly reasonable, non-chaotic lives. And they say, well, maybe if I adopt this language game, but very quickly. So you, you know, the, the great example, you go to the Billy Graham crusade and your life is a mess. So you go down to the front and you know, come just as you are. So you came, and all you have to do is love Jesus. I love Jesus. I pray the center's prayer. And before you know it, everybody in church is beginning to say, now you're going to need to start to live this way. They say, well, wait a minute. I thought I just had to say, I love Jesus. Oh no. Well, yeah. But see, they don't even know what's, yeah. No, it's not commands. It's not commands. Just, you know, we don't command anything. It's just, this is what's going on. It's so interesting. It's the most interesting thing. Like listening to people talk about that. Like I said, I'm sure I do it all the time. I just wouldn't, I'll do it. Yeah. So, and so the thing that I'm thinking about off of all of that sort of like elephant rider thing, people's motivations for doing stuff and going to somewhere else in the world. Like, so when you went to the Dominican, you went to the Dominican work of patients, right? That, yeah. So something that I've been so interested in living in New York is the way that people think about family and children because the, I don't like, there are people who have kids. A lot of people at work are like freezing their eggs or whatever. So for later in life and like, um, I'm so interested because like or I watched this video, this YouTuber is in Venezuela right now, like taking videos of like the slums and stuff and how hard it is and everything. And I'm seeing these kids, these like three year old kids who are like starving at these two kitchens. They get one meal a day and it's really, really hard. There's fucks. It's the worst thing in the world. And I'm thinking like, why on earth did your parents have children at? I read a story in the New York times today, but this guy from Nicaragua who's trying to get his three year olds, 27 he's trying to get his three year old son and his wife out of Nicaragua, but the Mexicans are stopping everything and all that stuff. And, uh, my first thought was nothing other than what you had a child at 23 and you couldn't guarantee your own safety or your own livelihood. Like, what a bizarre, like, what are you thinking? What are you like? What, what a weird, what motivated you to have this child? Like I, I don't, one child only, presumably if this was a birth control issue, you'd have several more than one child. There's all these like things that I have questions about these people who do that. So I've been down this rabbit hole recently, we have a lot of different YouTubers who, uh, I'm trying to understand how people are motivated to do things. And I don't know if you've ever heard of this one guy on YouTube, every, every video he makes gets a couple million views. It's called, is this YouTube name is internet historian. Um, so it's nothing to do with anything that you talk about, but I find it very interesting as like a cultural observation. So he's from New Zealand and he does a ton of research on internet phenomena and then makes like a one hour video or something that's for 20 minutes, however long that's like a summary of these events that have happened in the world that kind of originated from the internet. He did one on fire fest before the documentaries came out. He's done, he's done one on, um, it was just a bunch of different things. It's really, really interesting. And a lot of what he's talked about originally is like this internet subculture of, I don't know what you call it, like warfare or something that, that chat boards will take the sort of like, they're really hyper motivated to spend many hours of their life trying to figure out where Shia LaBeouf has put up an art installation because they want to troll Shia LaBeouf, right? So they'll dedicate weeks of their life, but like if you watch the video, the triggering of Shia is the video series that he did because Shia LaBeouf, I don't know if you've heard about this, but he did like a art installation where he just had a video on a, on a wall in Queens and it said, he will not divide us. And it was supposed to be like, so people would go up to the camera and say, he will not divide us. And then like obviously the internet goes to town. Well, not, maybe not obviously, this is my point. Like so it's live stream video of a wall in Queens where people are supposed to give you that. But people from all over the place started going to Queens and making fun of it and ruining the whole thing and just like trying to get, trying to get it angry, right? Cause like they think Shia is pretentious, and they want to knock him down to peg and like they just, you know, not necessarily want to see the world burn, but they see this guy, you know, who wants to show all the normal people how to live their lives. So they go and try to ruin it. And then Shia LaBeouf moves it into this rural like place in North, North Virginia or West Virginia or something where he's like going fishing. He doesn't tell anybody where it is. He just has a video of the, of the image or a flag or something. And he doesn't tell anyone where it is. It's just in a forest. And these people like triangulate the location based on the time of night and the stars in the sky. And then on air patterns is they, they watch the, cause there's the sky in view and they like figure out where it is. And then they have a guy drive around who just honking all around the like area where they point is they did all this work, right? And then you have these like hundreds of guys online that all this work to try just to get Shia LaBeouf to prove to Shia LaBeouf that he can't get away with this. Right. And it's, I'm so interested in like, what motivated these guys to do that, right? Like you spent so much time doing that or like you've had a couple of guys on who have mentioned Gamergate to you, which is also like a rabbit hole that I found down recently. Like I didn't really pay attention to it at the time, but it's a whole culture online even now of these guys who like experienced Gamergate were predominantly like this sort of left wing, uh, you know, 2005 era, you know, the video game culture, they all thought of themselves as progressives and then Gamergate happens and the feminists intrude on their lives and try to impose their will on the nerd space. And this whole breakout happens. And it motivates all of this massive political follow-up that occupies the mental space of thousands and thousands of people now. And like, it's just me trying to understand you like if all you wanted to do is play video games, that's what you would do. Right. But you don't want that. You want all this other stuff. You want to, you want to have a community that accomplishes these things you want to, and like you want to do all this stuff that brings people together. Maybe that's what it is. Maybe it's just bringing you together around this thing. Like it's just watching all these videos. I've been listening to a lot of, uh, the, I know you spoke with club, uh, trended Adam trended once a while ago. Doing these live streams with PSA Stitch for like six hours. And so I just had them on at work. I don't know if you've ever listened to one, but I've been like just crushing. I didn't find them until a week ago, but they're so bad. I just love listening to them talk for some reason. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. PSA Stitch is like a Gamergate guy as far as I can tell. And, uh, and so me trying to understand, so helpful for me to like, yeah, listen, six hours of conversation between two guys where they reveal their elephants and the writers the whole time. You get an idea for how they're thinking. And it like, I don't even have to live where they live, but it's just like moving across the country or whatever. You can understand, Oh, these are the sort of like ways that you react to this statement that Don Hoffman makes or this statement that this, you know, Ezra Klein makes or whatever. Right. And it's so interesting for me to hear to understand like, Oh, wow, this was my immediate reaction. These two guys immediate reaction. And it's such a, if there's more one reason I like your channels because you could be your immediate reaction in some sense to like, that's how you, you do like a one person version of what they do. Cause like you play a video and then you comment on it. Right. So the, um, and I think it's so interesting because it helps stimulate my own, understand my own elephant rider, you know, loop. And, uh, so anyway, I've been thinking a lot about like, like, so what are the motivations with like, like a genuine question? Like why do people have kids if they can't guarantee their, their own safety? Like I'm trying to figure out why guys like me would spend their time triangulating a flag in West Virginia. Like, why would people like the people you spent so much time with have children? Like what do you think is the, is the like, I know it's this old and rider thing. Like there, is it just so much in their elephant that says have children that they have to do it even despite the lack of security that we as Americans would say, not all Americans, but we as urban Americans, wow, that's so shocking. Well, you have children because you don't have security. Really? That's such an exact inversion of our own. But that's exactly right. People, if the more secure, the more secure people are the less children they have, even no children, which is why Europe and America, you know, are not having children. But if you're, if your life is radically chaotic and insecure, you actually have more children and it makes perfect sense biologically. If you have a fruit tree, you prune it because the prune tree bears more fruit. Yeah. It's not rational. Yeah. I, it's, I've been thinking about that for a while now, like trying to understand, like, I think they have so many kids and yeah, it's from our perspective, it's just, yeah, beyond. I remember at a class I was leading in a poor, a poor area in the Dominican Republic of Haitians. And I just asked the question one class is that how many of you have ever had a child die? Every couple in the room, they'd all lost children. And read history. You know, people, if you have any, if you play around with genealogies, one of the things that you learn is that, you know, little Johnny died in, in, in, you know, 1875 and they had another kid in 1876 and it was a boy and they named it Johnny. They recycled the name. Why? What's going on? Well, we lost one, John, but you know, this is, this is, this is John, this is his replacement. And we, we look at that as expressive individuals and say, well, that's horrible. They didn't look at it that way. And if you'd sit them down and ask them, well, why did you do that? They'd look at you funny. Like, why are you asking such a question? I know. Yeah. They wouldn't understand it at all. Right. It's our question for you to ask them specifically. Like, what do you mean? But yeah. Okay. So this actually bleeds into the last, I only have five minutes. This is the last question I have for you. I'm curious. My recollection growing up in the, I was, my grandfather was a pastor and lived in the house with him. A lot of his, he never got to really have conversations like this, right? Where you're having sort of high minded intellectual discussions about one thing or another. We call it high minded. Some like, some like, yeah. Yes. Yes. Um, abstract conversations about ideas, right? When people were to come into my, my Opus office, they would ask him for money or for a job or for help or for connections or for stuff. Um, I mean, maybe the specific church generally that we, I got him, but he didn't know. That's that that's normal all the way around the world. Same thing with pastors in the third world. So, right. And so like, you know, presumably the only kinds of people who would be approaching you for a conversation about these abstract ideas were a couple of people in the congregation, if that, and other pastors that you'd see at, uh, you know, seminary, seminary, reunions and stuff like that. Right. What's it like to have these, like your calendar is full of people who want to talk to you about this stuff. Now, it must be just the weirdest thing in the world. It's good though, because as a pastor, you long to have these conversations. And when, when you might, you know, before this, I might've had one of these conversations, I might've had 10 of these conversations a year. Now I have, you know, four or five, six, eight, 10 of them a day. Yeah, it's pretty crazy. It's fun because I love doing it. But just today, I was thinking, Ooh, I got to slow down. I'm putting a lot of voltage through the old noggin. And, and, but, and, and it's, it's, it's great. It's incredibly, I mean, it's incredible. It feeds me. I mean, I've always been an addict for this stuff. It feeds me, but the one can only take so much. So you don't want the rider getting too heavy for the elephant to bear. So no, you're, you're exactly right. You're, you're see, because you're, you're, your grandfather was kind of the leader of the community. He was sort of the Godfather. That's what, that's what pastors would do. You give them a seminary education and hopefully they gain wisdom from that. But what that did was that put them in contact with, with, with the line from the past and that helped the whole community travel through history. That's why you educate someone, especially in the past, helps them travel through history because your orientation comes from what you have behind you. That's, that's the only orientation you can really do. Because if you, in a sense, in a weird sense, if you're walking in the fog and well imagine a strange world of fog that everything forward is foggy, but everything back is clear. Well, what you really want to do is have a line in the back so that, and walk backwards into the future because you can't see forward anyway. So you guide yourself in terms of the back. Well, now in a context of such hyper change, living in interesting times, my friend. Yeah, it's going to be, it's going to be interesting. We have to end this, but this was great. And I very much want to share this conversation because this was really good. I really love your rant. Feel free. Okay. It was so good to talk to you again, Luke. Likewise. We'll talk again soon. Okay. Bye bye. Bye.