https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7Fo60nHXeXk

 prevarication guy. Well, I like, I like provocative. I mean, this is what, this is what tomorrow's video is about. I like provocative if, if we can do it right, because provocative can be so much fun if done right. Okay. Who's, who's that guy with the Bruin shirt on there? It's a different angle. What are you in your mom's basement? Yes. I'm in New Hampshire, man. Oh, you're in New Hampshire. All right. So say, so say it again. Say it again. What me? Yeah, you. Okay. I'm going to say something more specific. Okay. What are the, what are the, because up until quite recently, I've been re-attending my, what is essentially a Protestant church. Protestant, it's Anglican really, but they're Protestants, you know, in the way they, they conduct service, you know, in their theology. And one of the issues I've had is with the music. And that this may sound trivial, but I mean, there are videos on YouTube that will make a case for what I'm saying, but a lot of, a lot of the modern music that's been brought into Christianity. Now, I've been a music freak all my life. And I'm well aware of the, the way that music can provoke sentimentality, by which I mean unearned emotion. Does that make sense? Yes, it does. Does that, does that make sense? Now I am more guilty of that than anybody in, in this, in this chat, you know, I've got over 2000 DVDs, CDs, about 500 pieces of vinyl. That was my thing for the whole of my youth and thirties, you know, and I could be feeling perfectly normal and put on a CD or record and then end up crying because of some emotional, whatever, blah, blah, blah, blah. And one of the things I've noticed in the, the, the, quote, Protestant churches I've been to is the, the employment of that kind of music, the certain, I'm not a musician, but the harmonic and melodic structures that will evoke, it's lovely. I mean, it's absolutely lovely. You know, that really cathartic emotion. But my concern is that, that that is essentially being sold as some kind of spiritual experience, which I think it is not. And that's not to knock the music. I feasted on it all my life. That's perhaps something that led me astray, but you know, the employment of, you know, emotion, powerful, visceral emotion to suggest spiritual experience, union with God, the Holy Spirit entering into us, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Well, I have thought that for evangelicals, especially big box, mega church evangelicals, music, or it was Paul Anleitner that said music is their sacrament. And I'd say music is their psychedelic. Right. Yeah. Well, there we go back to Jordan Peterson is DMT stuff and whatnot. Yeah. And I don't buy into that. I've taken not only not recently, but quite a lot of LSD and, you know, DMT and stuff like that. And I don't buy into the Jordan Peterson treatment of that. I'll be quite honest. I buy into the atheist critique of that, that that is something chemically happening in the mind that can produce all kinds of wonderful experiences, but that does not make them real. So then is orthodoxy sobriety as compared to evangelical music slash Well, I think that's how I'm seeing it at the moment. Yeah, it is. Yeah. But I mean, of course, that's not fair to evangelicalism or, or Protestantism in general. You know, there's more to it than that. But when it gets into that, that kind of experience, I'm, I'm deeply suspicious. Yeah, I am. I am, you know, it becomes, you know, this is what Gavin Ashenden, you commented on that lovely lady, she, she interviewed Gavin Ashenden. This is the distinction he made between Jesus as the therapist and the Redeemer. And as he said, Jesus is not our therapist. He's our Redeemer. He's also a healer. Okay. Well, okay. I'll throw my thing out there. So now let's talk. Now let's hear, let's hear some more, Rando. What were your thoughts? Well, if I can just jump in real quick, because, Jim, I know you said earlier that you're joining the Coptic church you're looking to. Yes. Yeah. I became orthodox a little over a year ago after I was catechized for over a year. And I too, I sort of self-medicated on music growing up. I didn't have any religious background. And what you're talking about with your experience with Anglicanism, I know there's a technical term for this. I'm not sure what it is, but I know that at least within the Eastern Orthodox tradition, there's, there's an intentional downplaying of the emotional aspects of the music. Like it is, the music is designed in such a way as to not evoke a certain emotional response. Okay. And that is something that, that it didn't draw me to Orthodox, but when I first encountered the liturgical worship, it was something that was very noticeable for me. It was certainly a beautiful aesthetic experience, but it wasn't, it wasn't the same experience that I had got. Like if I've gone to multiple concerts in my twenties, a sort of little secular pilgrimages, and those were qualitatively different from my experience within the Orthodox liturgical set. Yeah, it's funny. Yeah. Well, it almost sounds like Orthodoxy is a detox. There was, I'll tell you a little story in the Christian Reformed Church. That's an interesting point. When the Christian Reformed Church had a blue Psalter hymnal for years from 1976, and then in the 80s, 90s, they wanted to do a new Psalter hymnal. And they rewrote the tunes on a bunch of songs so as to avoid the enthusiasm of some of the music. And you can imagine exactly how that was received in the churches. It's like, we're going back to the old hymnal, because this is, this is my jam when I get into church to, you know, feel the feels and, you know, but, and, but this, so this is, this is really interesting to me. Yeah. Sorry, Carol. The Protestant section of the Discord has been talking about Protestant contributions to art recently. That's been a subject for like the past week or two. And what comes up over and over again is that Protestant's main art form is music. Yes. Especially because we, you know, are kind of down on the icons and even perhaps down on like church architecture and stuff like that. A lot of Protestant artistic energy gets funneled into music. And it's, it's something very characteristic of every form of Protestant really to have its own particular musical flavor, right? Martin Luther was a hymn writer. You know, the Wesley brothers were hymn writers. Like what, what would African American Christianity be if it didn't have its music? It seems mostly a musical, you know, coherence more than it is a doctrinal or ecclesiastical ecclesiological coherence. Yep. Yep. And charismatic, you know, like early wave, you know, charismatic, Pentecostalism has its own kind of music. And then, you know, like mega churchdom, probably the most authentic thing that they do is have their own musical tradition. Yep. That's one of the few things they don't appropriate. Yep. Is that they actually generate that themselves for themselves. And a Protestantism's musical tradition often overflows into popular music. And sometimes the direction is obviously in the other direction. But I would say most of the time throughout history, it's actually the church's music that then spills over and gets appropriated by secular, by the culture. And maybe that's starting to wane a little bit now, but, but it's hard to say. But it's not Protestantism isn't just like all music goes all the time. One of one of my favorite, you know, I don't know, periods or subjects of history that I'm really fascinated by is the development of blues music. I'd like a period of my life where I just loved blues, studied blues, you know, learned all my favorite guitar players and all that sort of thing. And in the 20s and 30s in the South, when blues music was really coming into its own, there was gospel, black gospel music and black blues music. And those things were unmixable in the minds of their respective audience. Right? If you started being too bluesy in a gospel setting or a gospel recording, they would recognize it. They'd be like, that's the devil's music or very harsh language like that. And say, you can't bring that in here. Right? And sometimes and like various guitarists or recording artists, they would have their gospel name where they were Father Deacon, such and such. And then they would have their blues name where they were blind Mississippi, such and such. Right. And they would record their different music, but they had to split their persona to be able to be popular in both genres. So it's not like Protestantism doesn't recognize that music has power and that in that power, there is danger and that there aren't lines that could be crossed. But and in fact, they're often more aware of it really than other traditions, because in many ways, music sort of captures and expresses the spirit of various forms of Protestantism better than anything else does. And they know when their spirit is getting contaminated by something that could lead it astray. And it's interesting how, especially in African-American traditions, that's in musical styles and flavors. And so anyway, I'll stop there. But it's really interesting because the most uplifting hints, for whatever better term, are from the, you know, Black American Baptists, if that's politically incorrect. But I've seen some services there where they're really going for it. And it really seems authentic and beautiful. It's such untrammeled joy, but authentic. It feels authentic. But, you know, in the churches I've been to, you know, in Britain. Yeah, you got none of that, huh? It's hollow and empty. Hey, those Westley hymns in England in the late 1700s, those Westley hymns were capturing those Westley hymns were capturing that evangelical spirit in England in a way that, say, the mainstream Anglican church wasn't. Right. And so, you know, that enthusiasm and authenticity has been in England, too. Maybe America's still in your thunder on that. It's not as good, though. Sorry, that's just my opinion. When it comes to African-Americans and music, I mean, having most of my life been in a church, in African-American communities without, I mean, we don't do the music right at all. And sometimes when we try, it's really bad. But so many of the people that, you know, that are in my congregation, they've sort of got a love-hate relationship with some of this stuff. Some of them really miss it. Others of them go to this church because we don't have it. You know, and but there's lots of other things that go along with that. There was one deacon in my church that used to tell me, you know, if I'd start sweating and pounding a pulpit, she'd be out of here like her skirt was on fire. That's what she always told me. Because she wants to come to church because she wants to learn something. And of course, I mean, the kind of preacher I am, I'm a learning preacher. So that's what I do. Yes. So there's a lot to this. And I am very interested in this. I have a bit of skepticism about how about whether orthodoxy will really wear long for everyone who goes to it now. I'm not saying that all I mean, Peugeot has been in it for, you know, for 15 years or so. And that's a pretty good sign. I think some people will use it for kind of a detox and a cleansing. But then, and I also think all of these people coming into the Orthodox Church, they're going to change it too. And, you know, at some point, someone's going to say, we need a ball pit because we have way too many kids and the ball pit in the Orthodox Church. So I'm curious. I'm really curious how this whole experiment is going to go. Yeah. Well, with the church I go to, I mean, I'm the only white boy there. I mean, literally, I'm the only white boy there. It's all Ethiopians, Eritreans, Egyptians. And I'm like, that probably is part of the appeal to me because I want to be as removed as possible from any kind of Western influence. So I don't know if what you're talking about is going to happen there in the near future, Paul. But yeah, I mean, what matters to me is authenticity. And, you know, in, I'm going to say, in a lot of the white Protestant churches I've been to, when everyone's throwing their hands up in the air and whatnot, it just doesn't feel right. It just doesn't feel right. But, you know, then, you know, I watch, you know, one of those hardcore, you know, I'm going to say all black Baptist Church, really rock in the house and it feels authentic. It's the authenticity that matters. And if they feel that joy and they express it in their singing. Well, that's what they're using for enchantment, I think. And then when Peterson talks about narcotics, he's talking about a form of enchantment. And music is like resonant enchantment. So Manuel and I did a talk on my YouTube channel on navigating patterns about enchantment. Do you have a Patreon? I have a subscribe star. Oh, okay. Okay. Just check. If we're gonna pimp our channels here, so keep going. I dropped it on Friday. It's weird that you're talking. But one of the things we talked about, because it was this exploration, like we didn't know what the hell, we didn't know where that was going to go. We don't have a lot of notes on enchantment. It's just a topic that keeps coming up. So we're looking at music as resonant enchantment, among other things, primarily resonant. That's good. Resonant and rhythmic enchantment is a type of enchantment. And you need that enchantment. And you're looking at the re-enchantment of the world. And Pigeot put it, I forget which talk I listened to him on recently, but he was talking about re-enchantment happens. I'm kind of like, well, maybe enchantment is always there. And we're trying to engage with it. And we get too far away. And then we have to come back and get drugs or whatever, right? These cycles, more music, more idols, more whatever it is. And I think that the advantage of something like the Orthodox Church is that they have more types of enchantment to draw you in. Yeah. I mean, the thing that really matters to me isn't the music, isn't how it sounds. It's it's the authenticity of the experience. And, you know, is it provoking in me something that is sentimental? Something that just, oh, it's just, you know, allowing me to be cathartic. Does that make sense? Catharsis, the Greek catharsis? Or is it something that is connecting me more to an authentic religious experience? A sense of awe in God, perhaps. That's why I love a lot of the Orthodox Church. How are you going to get catharsis without something bigger than where you're at? Right. And I would say that's where enchantment comes in. It opens that space into potential to go out through the values, right? And say, ah, I connect with something bigger than the material world that I'm stuck in, roughly speaking. And that's what enchantment's all about. I suppose it's because for myself, because for a lot of my life, it's been fake through secular music. I'm worried about is this authentic or is it fake? Yeah. Well, Sally Jo. Am I feeling sorry for myself because I'm a sinner and this hymn just brings up that emotion and enables me to cry a bit and gain that kind of melancholic pleasure that can come from releasing that grief or... Are you releasing it or are you drowning in it? Right? Because if it doesn't go out, if it doesn't go out of this material plane, it just comes looping back. Right. And then you're stuck in, instead of being stuck in having mode, to use a bravace language, you're stuck in being mode, right? It's emotional masturbation at its worst. I don't mean to be crude, but it it's emotional masturbation. It sounds like what you're saying is that in many ways, your relationship with music has been pornographic. Yes. That's what you're saying. When the art doesn't attach to something outside, when it becomes... So Sally Jo was talking about this ages ago, a year and a half ago, right? When the art stopped being about the religious topics, the art got corrupted because you can't do art for art's sake. You have to do art for the sake of something bigger than the material world. Right. Okay. Okay. That makes sense. That makes absolute sense. I want to read what Jacob... Now, just a reminder to everyone who made it into the room on time, that the green room is for... If you want to give someone else a chance to talk, look into the green room and you can pop out. Although Luke wants to talk and Luke gets lots of chances to talk. But Jacob was in there briefly and he said this, is people going to Orthodox church the same move as others trying to recreate pagan worship? That's a really interesting question. I know, I know. Ouch. Ouch, ouch, ouch. This court is reeling. So there's nothing inherently wrong with the paganistic urge, I would say. It's just that it gets very insular in paganism. Whereas Christianity gave that urge an outlet and like a sphere to bind everyone together in one thing and they could have their little paganistic, you know, party time, but it's still within the sphere and it binds the community together instead of having a little tiny community that all have to fight. If I may, it's what you were hinting at, Paul, a kind of ultra conservative impulse pulling people back to Orthodoxy. I think there's a sense... I've seen that with people on YouTube. Oh yes. I won't name names, but yeah. And in the Paul Kingsnorth conversation, that woman, I mentioned her in the video and she came into the comment section when she said, well, maybe Orthodoxy is a kind of Christianity where you don't have all the bad stuff, like from the Protestants and Catholics, there are those around, so maybe it's this other form of Christianity. And I think it's exactly in that particular impulse, I'm not writing the whole thing off, but that particular impulse is the same as, oh, the suppressed gospels of Jesus and lane Pagels and other Christianities that we can take that haven't been sullied by Pope's and preachers. And I think there's a lot of that in the attempt at regaining sort of a paganism too. Oh, I'm going to go... And it's the same with these feminist witches when actual scholars of witches say, no, actually they're really deeply Christian. The imagination that witches were like suppressed feminists, perennial feminists that have always been around, it's like, this is totally made up. But that reading onto is a real danger in almost any appropriation of what is at least new to us. Yeah. So was that, Paul, did you say that was Jacob who made that comment? Yeah, that was Jacob Harris. So Jacob Harris, not Jacob, Jewish Jacob? No, not Jewish Jacob. Okay. Okay. Okay. That's what I was really asking. I thought that was Jewish Jacob, which would seem uncharactered. Yes. Yes. Well, he would say Christianity is the pagan worship. I mean, that was where it all went wrong. I came to Christianity as someone who was involved in like what I would call now like occult practices. And I came to the point where I really wanted to be, I wanted to become a Christian until it started to happen. Then I was like, oh crap, like I hope I don't actually become a Christian. And I remember in that process of becoming a Christian, I was like, well, you know, I was trying to like, you know, hedge my bets or whatever. I don't know quite the right, but I was like, well, I just, I hope I know I was most attracted to orthodoxy, but I didn't want to become orthodox because of all the, all the discipline, because of all, there's a lot more pressure and accountability, at least what I saw. And now being in the church, I can see that. So for me, I mean, that was the draw and the- Yes. And I'm not baptized yet. And I'm, so I'm in a very difficult place where I know I'm a big sinner, particularly from an orthodox perspective, but that's part of the draw. It's providing mechanisms and incentives for me to be actually become more righteous. Not that I will ever be worthy, you know, but- Well, we go to church because we're not worthy. Yeah. A worry that- Oh, go ahead. So I don't want to be too mean because I should say that I really respect Nathan and Jim's journeys a lot, but a tendency that I can see in some people migrating to orthodoxy, and I do not want to project this on everybody because people have lots of different motivations and stuff like that, but it is sort of, it can serve as blank slate tradition Christianity onto which I can project a lot of the things that I always wanted Christianity to be. And then I, and not have the things that I don't like from my previous Christian past. And what's interesting is like you, Jim and Nathan are actually not particularly Christian in your upbringing and are coming into it, I think kind of for different reasons than what I'm talking about, but like some, you know, if you, if you always wish that your Christianity was more artistically, visually expressive, well then like, you know, man, Jonathan Pajot is certainly- Yeah. ...picture quite literally of an orthodox Christianity that's very different than that. If you are sick of a Christianity that was feminized and never stood up for itself, well then like people like Jay Dyer are offering you that, you know, super masculine, self-assertive, we have all the answers and we're not afraid of it, you know? Or if you really like, oh, you know, my Christianity was super judgmental, I want this, you know, completely open-minded, open-hearted Christianity, well then David Bentley Hart is there to offer you his kind of projection of orthodox Christianity. And like those are three very different pictures. They're huge. They're huge. What? I was just saying like Catholicism, it's not quite, it's not Catholicism obviously, but Orthodox, the Orthodox Church is massive compared to any other product. Right. But what I worry about is because people don't know too much, say, about like Byzantine history or whatever, that it can serve as this blank slate possibility and why the Catholicism can't, right? Catholicism has way too much baggage whether you grew up Catholic or not. If you grew up in the West, in America or Europe, you have way too much baggage to blank slate-ify, you know, Catholicism, but Orthodoxy, you can, whether or not you should or shouldn't. And I'm not, again, I'm trying to be- Is it almost ignorance is bliss? Purity. Because in the West, you know, we've basically either come from, if we've come from any kind of Christian background, it's been either fundamentally Lutheran or Catholic. You know, this Orthodoxy is this wonderful new thing that we can now- Like Buddhism sometimes. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, like Buddhism. We can completely reject the values that we want to see in Christianity onto that, well, Orthodoxy in this case. I see. So Joey said in the comments, in times of great chaos, people instinctively look back into the past for the last period of time that seemed to make sense. And so there's all these varying things. I love how you laid that out, Sam, because there's also the novel. I mean, in California, it's like, I want to be Buddhist because it's going to give me my best life now. And it's like, have you ever read anything about Buddhism and attachment and desire? And it's like, all the sheep Buddhists- Meditated for four hours non-stop. Non-stop. Yeah, yeah. What Buddhism are you looking for? And same with all these various Christianities. And again, it's part of this layer of things that we can't seem to deconstruct, like our consumerism. Like if you really wanted to be radical, go to the nearest church geographically to you, regardless of what they do or teach or preach. That's a radical. You want to be Pentecostal, Paul? Like I went on a backpacking trip in Nepal one time. And most of the Westerners that you meet when you're trekking in Nepal, when you're hanging out in the tea houses after your day of hiking, are there because they're interested in Buddhism to some degree or another, right? A good significant chunk are on some degree of Buddhist curious. And then you're walking through these towns, which are populated by native Tibetan Buddhists. And there's a difference between the Buddhist that you're talking to in your hotel that is actually a dentist from upstate New York and the Buddhist that you're seeing in the town, right? Oh, massive. I saw some people, they were presenting goat intestines before a shrine of a phallic fertility god in the town, presumably for some sort of purpose related to that. I didn't see any of the Western Buddhists doing that sort of thing when I was trekking in Nepal. And sometimes I worry if there is something like that split going on in kind of Western conversions to Eastern orthodoxy, is like that divide between the Buddhists who are trekking in Nepal and the Buddhists who actually live in Nepal. Yeah, but Buddhism is tricky in particular, right? So Eastern Buddhism and Western Buddhism aren't the same thing at all. And almost nobody in the West understands this. Part of it's cultural and part of it's the way we think versus the way they think. There's a book called The Geography of Thought, it's rather old, but it just goes through all these experiments that show that Easterners just think differently than Westerners. Totally, totally different presumptions and assumptions. They have an easier time thinking the way we think than we have thinking the way they think. And when you start to look at their system, read the Dao Te Ching or something like that and Ecclesiastes. But all of this stuff is the same in the East. It's not that far off. A lot of Buddhists will read Dao Te Ching and say, oh yeah, this is right up my alley, because it's the same structure. But actually what's happening is they have a thing outside of the dualism, outside of the yin-yang. And that's roughly speaking the thing that created all the things. And you can see that in the, it's especially clear in the Taoist, although it's hard with the translation because they confuse the Tao and the 10,000 things. Those aren't the same thing. And Buddhism has that same issue where there is a thing outside of the thing they're talking about that is roughly speaking equivalent to the creator. It's the larger container that everything fits in. So you don't get stuck in this cycle because Eastern Buddhists don't get stuck in the cyclical nature of things. They use it for prediction, but they don't sit back and say that's all there is. It's just all cyclical. They don't do that. They don't fall into nihilism unless they get hit with Western secular materialism and then Japan falls right away. Boom. So weird. Yeah. Well, I mean, I studied Tai Chi on and off for 10 years with bona fide Taoists who were part of the Lao Tzu water tradition of Taoism, which claims to be the oldest tradition, 4,000 years, 4,000 year old tradition. And there were similarities with Buddhism. And one of the things that really strikes me between those traditions and the Abrahamic Christian, Jewish, Islamic is that the Buddhists and the Taoists are bottom, what I call bottom up religions. And if you look at the story of Siddhartha, he leaves his palace. He tries out Brahmanism. He tries out ascetism. He does this blah, blah, blah, blah. And at the end of the day, he sits under the tree and he meditates. He goes to this meditative practice. He goes into himself and this reveals to him certain metaphysical truths about the nature of the universe. Now, I think the fundamental pattern is the same with Taoism, but they don't end up, they don't end up with God. Certainly not the Lao Tzu tradition of Taoism. They are fundamentally agnostic when it comes to the issue of what or if anything created the universe and God. And I'm not saying that's wrong. Yes. Right. Creators are agnostic. It's totally different. Yeah. But creation, they're not agnostic on creation. And that's the difference, is that Western Buddhists are agnostic on creation. And they have to, because they have to assume creation in order to make any of their crazy systems work. And that's the middle out thinking. They're dropping themselves into literally the middle of the story and going, oh, look around, look up and look down and we're in the middle. I mean, they're literally earth-centric, right? Except the earth is them. And they're like, you know, you Lawrence Krauss, I can see what that is and I can see what that is. And so obviously the world is rotating around me. And if I can just manipulate it a little bit, right? And well, it's going to go back and forth. That's fine. I don't care. But the Eastern Buddhists aren't like that. They're like, no, no, no, no, this is all in a bigger container of creation. And then they're agnostic about creator, but those are two different things. And this gets to third personal and second personal. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Very, very different. And don't you think, I mean, I'm just going to throw this out there. It's a bit provocative, but from a very Christian point of view, if you consider the, the tower of Babel, that fundamentally Buddhism and Taoism are towers of Babel. Well, it's always, um, that's always, it's nice directional in that sense. And Christianity likes to much be more, be more top down. This is God revealing Jesus comes. It's all that top down. Or as search for God is, is very tower of Babel ish. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. As Christian, I would say God exists, the Trinity exists and everything flows from that. And then you eventually, you eventually end up with a morality laws, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Well, and God finding us, it comes, it comes from God. It comes from God. It's not man working. Right. And that's terrifying. It's absolutely not salvation by works. Every Christian could agree on that. I think the ants would love to study the humans at their, at their discretion, but the human studying the ants, that's, that's, that's very disruptive. If you're an ant, you know, there is a very big directionality difference. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know if I'm right about that, but we start from, as I say, as a Christian, but the ultimate metaphysical truth claims and everything flows down from that. Well, Bishop Baron, and one of the things kept saying, no, God has spoken, God has spoken. And this is, you know, CS Lewis makes this point about pantheism is we do, we would much rather have religion be a, a, something, a hobby of our own instead of, you know, I, and I've often reversed it when you look at, let's say that the Tabernacle and the temple, the Tabernacle in the desert, there was a, that was a containment unit because when God breaks out, you know, people die. And so what can we do with this, with this wild God? All right. And then we live in fear. Well, he, he specified the container said, if I'm, if a Holy God's going to live in the midst of an unholy people, there's going to have to be some boundaries here, folks, because um, it gets, when, when things get all messy together, it's, it's a problem. So, yeah. God sounds pretty sus. Joey says, we have good, good, healthy comments going here. Well, is this, is this it? I have to leave by four 10. So just to let you, that's California time. It's 10 after the hour. I feel so radio like, you know, at 10 after the hour I'm gone. And, um, that's good. In my solipsistive live stream, you all go with me. Poof. Yeah. It's, it's, it's five minutes to midnight where I am. I think I have a, I think I have a question. Yeah, go ahead. So I might be extremely generalizing here. I think I am, but let me just put it this way. So in my experience with Protestantism, I'm Catholic, my experience with Protestantism, the experience of God is something like God comes down and overwhelms you with his grace and you cannot help but accept. Whereas I think it's very Catholic. Yeah. And then the Catholic and Orthodox view, it's God comes and presents you grace and you have to accept and cooperate. We have the chance to turn away. So maybe there's something there where it gives you more agency in that view. So in a Protestant view, so the knock on Roman Catholicism in, in traditional Calvinist circles was always that Roman Catholics are semi-Pelagian and you just articulated that difference. I mean, that basically is Protestants can be even more Pelagian than the Catholic. Oh yes. Protestantism has the full spectrum within it. Yes. But no, that's, that's really, that's right. So maybe people are thinking part of it. This is not obviously not the whole thing. People are thinking maybe this is really articulating the way I think things are better than something like Calvinism. Maybe they feel extremely alienated by something like Calvinism where it like puts them out of the picture completely. They don't have any kind of choice. They're just puppets. But what's interesting is that one could very well get that impression by, by listening to Calvinist doctrine. But if you actually watched Calvinists, they don't act like that. Obviously not. Cause it's almost impossible to generalize that. Yeah. So, um, but yeah, those tensions and then the tensions between, let's say a, a doctrinal system that, that you are catechized with and then how the community lives that out. I mean, there's just innu, there's just innumerable ways that these things work themselves through. And all of those things then go into be their own traditions. And then how do these traditions coexist? Um, can they, can they, I mean, tomorrow's video will be more about that. Can they engage with each other productively without losing themselves? How do they deal with the fact that usually what happens in church history is that you have these movements in and out of these different traditions, often based on, you know, one of the big things with Protestant churches to circle back to where we started has been music. People go to, people go to the church much more for the worship leader than for the preacher. You know, much to the preacher's chagrin. Um, if you've got hot music, you'll grow a church. I mean, Rick Warren, I remember he was talking to, you know, he had his mythology about Saddleback and all of this stuff. And then he admitted things really took off when we got this worship guy, then whoosh, they came in by the thousands. Oh, maybe your genes just aren't skinny enough. I don't know. Me and skinny jeans. I don't, I don't know if anybody really wants that. Yeah, we'll, we'll pass, but it is the power of rhythmic enchantment versus the propositional enchantment. And the propositional enchantment in the Bible is hard to get your head around because it's metaphorical. We're living in a literal world. And so you can, you can see that. I mean, the number of conversations I've been in when I've used a, you know, a archetypal outline and somebody was like, well, that's sexist. And I'm like, how is the divine feminine sexist? Like, I don't get it. Like that's nothing to do with anything. It's just an archetype, but they can't, they can't deal in archetypes at all. It's just cut off from their brain. And then, and part of that goes back to submission. They can't submit. And so what are you submitting to? Are you submitting to the music? Are you submitting to the sermon? Are you submitting to the charisma of the pastor? Right. Are you submitting to the, the emotions that you get being in fellowship with, with other Christians? Like, what are you submitting to? Or are you trying to submit to nothing? In which case you're going to have a hard time because you can't have intimacy. You can't have trust without submission. Right. And so I'm only going to submit when I go through and see, I agree with everything. Then I'll submit, then I'll submit to my Orthodox bishop until he tells me I need to wear masks. And then all of a sudden, yeah, I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. And that's been something that's really been bothering me because I'm, I'm still working my way to Christianity, but what keeps coming back to me is that issue of submission. And it's, it's interesting because we, we talked about Buddhism, Daoism earlier, and I'm not pushing Buddhism, Daoism, but one of the things my, the Daoist teacher that taught me Tai Chi talked about was that what people fear the most is not the fear of death. It's the fear of the ego. It's the fear of the loss of self. Okay, right. Screw Daoism now. But as I, as I'm pushing, pushing, push towards Christianity, what I find, what I find scares me the most, it's not, it's not the thought of death. It's, it's the submission. It's, it's that little death, the little death. It's what the Daoist called the little death, the death of the ego. The, you know. It's the death you have to experience because you're still living. Yes. It's the, it's the negation of self. Yeah. In, in, in, you know, it's the negation of self and the trust that the Lord carry, carry you forward. And that's a massive thing, man. But part of worship is the, the both end of that, because when you're worshiping in a rhythmic, enchanted way, you are both giving yourself, you're both submitting to it, but you're also participating in it. And, and I think, you know, people fear, people fear tyranny. Well, trust is always, or submission is always about trust. It's looking at the person and saying, you know, more than I do, I will trust you. And, but, but then in terms of worship, it is, it is a submission while it's also a participation. It's, it's letting, it's letting the music, music have its way with us. Okay. Yeah. You need that death to have growth, right? Peterson talks about burning off the dead wood. Yeah. It's terrifying. It is. For a lot of people, that's absolutely terrifying. It should be. At the moment, you've got nothing. They're mostly. And then you are entirely dependent on God. You've got absolutely nothing. You are entirely dependent on God. Well, and hopefully you have your community, you need your community too. And this is where I think John Vervicki falls short because he doesn't understand transformation requires communities and a certain type. And, and, and again, the double container, it can't be one container like Wikipedia got, cause that container is going to blow up reliably. I don't think I don't have that second container. Yeah. I don't think he doesn't understand it. You know, Megan, Dom and, and, um, David Fuller were just basically lauding community on, on their recent podcast too, but pulling it off because again, community is always a thing that you are surrendering something of yourself to each other. And that thing grows. But what we've learned in the church too, there has to be levels of submission. There has to be cooperation. There can't be abuse. Um, I mean, in some ways, community is the ultimate test of your ideas and of your, of what, whatever it is that you're pushing, not views. It'll corrupt reliably if there's not something past it. So you need a larger container than just the community to orient your container in and yourself in so that you know when your container's off track and that's where people are. They're just like, oh, community is going to fix this. And I'm like, there's lots of communities. They all die fairly quickly. Right. That's why, because they have no unifying factor outside themselves. So they sell. Absolutely. Absolutely. I mean, if you heard of the philosopher Alan de Botton, I mean, he's wrote a few books, but one of, one of his books, which I bought, oh, about a decade ago, well before I was looking back to Christianity, it's called religion for atheists. And it's an attempt to create that. Well, you know, what I think is really the tower of Babel you've just described Mark, you know, this attempt to create community, but without that transcendent value. Is that what you were saying? Is that, am I? Yeah. Okay. Yeah. No, that's, that's, that's exactly it. Like you can create all the communities you want, but if the communities aren't referencing a higher common good and it has to be a common good, it can't be what I think is good today because then you get what Vervicki calls steal the culture. And I think the problem is John got exactly what he wanted. We're living in the age of steal the culture. That's literally where we're living. The problem is that it didn't start from the resurrection, roughly speaking. I'm not a Christian, but I'm telling you, this is important because what happens is, you know, as you start in the middle, you get all these little religions that are perfect. Like, oh, I just want to care about the earth. So I'm a climate religion person, or I just want to care about safety. Right. And I have a video of that on navigating patterns too, right? Where I talk about the three great religions and there's way more than that. But we get into these little religions where the patterns right there and we identify against everybody who's not in our, in our religion. Those are containers. They're all corrupt containers. They're all the problem. Everybody's identifying, but nobody's going back and saying, Oh, that's because we don't have a common good. We have different highest values. If your highest value is safety, you need to get a shot and have a card to prove it. Period. Otherwise you're impure and you got to go. You're an anti-something. And if your highest value is piety, then that's a game changer. It's as if your heart above all is an idle factory or something. Yes. Yes. Right. Right. And then you see that pattern everywhere. You know, maybe it's BLM, right? Maybe it's, you know, maybe it's, it's, you know, animals like the ASPCA it's taken off because they do those horrible animal commercials. They just so animal abuse all over the place and say, just give us 12 bucks a month. And you know, like that's their highest thing. And it's like, well, is that the most important problem that we need to put the most resources to right now? Right. And it gets, and you get the tower babble, you get everybody's just in these different religions that they ginned up literally in their houses. Right. And some of them upgraded their houses. Good for them. And then they, they're, they're bringing people along with them, but now everyone's got 60,000 different religions and we're not aimed at a common anything, much less a common good. Many of these things are aimed at the bad without, without understanding. You can't tell, right? Cause you have nothing to orient the container to. So you're oriented to the container. The container is not oriented to anything. That container could go anywhere. You'll never know. You're in the container. Go ahead, Nathan. Did you want to get in there? I did. Probably because I don't really know what we're talking about anymore, but also because, um, just to get back to North, I think I can tie this into what Mark, I, I was following what you were saying and, and a lot of things were collecting, but I'm going to try to put it in my like stupid way of thinking, please, you know, um, there's a lot of focus, at least on the discord on like evangelicals turning to orthodoxy, et cetera, et cetera. But, um, I think there is, there's a lot of people like myself. I know the, um, the much more in Vin Armani, Jim, people who come from traditions outside of Christianity, they look at orthodoxy and they see something that, yes, it is exotic. Yes, it is outside of this Western framework. And it's because I think it's for me, it was, it was the first time I, I saw something that seemed, um, outside of this, uh, propositional way of viewing the world. And I know that's not fair to, I've learned a lot from this group, um, about these different Christian traditions, but for me, orthodoxy really had something that, uh, it allowed me to not worry about the propositions up front. So I was very much of you dive in, you do the practices and then you learn propositions. Whereas from my Western Christian friends, it seems almost the inverse where you have, you get the right propositions and then you have the experience. Um, and for me, that was the opposite with an orthodoxy. Yeah, I like that. Yeah. The participatory first, which is actually what Vervicki talks about, right? We think you need to go. Participatory knowledge comes first up from the bottom, as Peterson says, right? You participate, embodied knowledge comes first and then it, and then it spreads out. I think that's correct. And that's the way it should be, but there's a propositional form of enchantment. And when Vervicki talks about, uh, propositional tyranny, like that's the same sort of thing. We're in this propositional tyranny, and then it's a battle of the best propositions and the best propositions are the most accurate, reliable, consistent, uh, and precise, right? Those are all scientific. And we can't do that if we want enchantment. If you want enchantment, you can't rely on, on that measure. You need to go to a quality measure, not a quantity measure. And it's really a tyranny of quantity over a tyranny of quality. And we really need to get back the quality because that's where enchantment lives in quality. Enchantment is all about re-infusing the quality, reviving the tradition, burning off the dead wood and replacing it with something transcendent. Sevilla shaved her head. Where did you see that? No, no, no, it's, it's just quality. You just went to, you wanted the quality. I thought, oh, it's like I'm talking to Sevilla. Have you been on Sevilla's channel yet? No, no, I have not, but I'd love to go in Sevilla's. I've been on Karen Wang's channel a few times. Well, I, go ahead, Sam. I'll compliment orthodoxy after criticizing it, or the move to orthodoxy, I guess I should say, is that one thing that I've noticed that like seems to be a pattern, especially in the last month or two in conversations in this corner of the internet, like the, the sticks hammer guy talking to Peugeot, it seemed entirely about I'm in charge versus God's in charge, right? Yeah. And when Peugeot, he interviewed that one storyteller guy, and like, and the guy was like, I don't like the idea that there's one true good story up there, and we're always just trying to tell it. I want the freedom to tell whatever story I want. And Jonathan's like, no, there's a story up there, right? And there's a little bit of that when like Paul or I or someone else is talking with John Vervecky about the, you know, is the spiritual end goal in myself, or is it something higher? And John kind of is a little bit of both sometimes depending on, and he's a little bit nuanced in that, but that tension seems to be coming up, especially between the Christians and the non-Christians talking in this corner of the internet over and over again. Am I submitting to something bigger than myself, or is it at the end of the day, mostly about me, right? And I will say one thing I really do admire about this kind of move towards orthodoxy is that it does seem to be capturing this idea of submission, and there's something bigger than me, and I need to realize that. And I think that that is one of the things that I admire about it the most, I guess I'd say. I'll just jump in. Was there honestly a conversation between Pajow and Sticks and Hammer 66? Yes, yes, yes. I even did a commentary in the first 20 minutes. Wow, I'll look that up. That'll be interesting. Sorry, carry on, guys. Here's your submission, Sam. Yeah, there's a religion of submission. All right, folks, I gotta cut the scream and stream, and I gotta go home, and I gotta call my mom, because I call my mom on Mondays. So, all right, y'all. Great talking to you guys. Thank you all very much. I'm gonna jump out, too. Thank you all very much. Thanks, Paul. Thanks, everyone else. Bye-bye.