https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=HsihHWBXNAM

 Well, Gary, you are famous on the channel for being one of the top winners of the first sweepstakes. One of the top losers that can actually be there first. That's right. They can actually get there second or third and say, ah, nuts, and congratulate the winner. So you've told me a little bit about yourself. What's on your mind to talk about today? All right. So obviously for quite some time, you've been talking about Jordan Peterson. That's how you got on the status rocket, as you put it. But I thought that I wanted to talk a little bit about Jordan Peterson and this idea of meaning making. It's really it's like part of what I do for a living is making making meaning. And for years, I taught college for years. And so I taught graphic symbolism. So lots of stuff that you talk about and obviously that Peugeot talks about are our interests of mine, but from a slightly different perspective, most of the time. So for instance, with Peugeot, he's talking about symbolic meaning very often. He's talking about subject matter. So whatever the subject matter is, a cross is a subject matter. But my perspective as a designer is so funny. I also want to talk about this in respect with respect to you. You've always mentioned that there's a lot of artists who follow you. There's a reason for that. And I want to touch on that a little bit because we're often about making meaning. And that meaning might be, in Peugeot's case, subject oriented. But there's a formal aspect to that. And there's a way that we're all being manipulated. And I don't say that in just sort of a negative way. But there's a positive manipulation. Your attention is being called to something in a positive way that you want to know or that you need to know or that you need to learn about or whatever. So it's not manipulative, it's just a negative connotation. And so I wanted to actually get your response to that a little bit and sort of feel you out for it. So does that sound like a reasonable conversation for us to have? Yeah, sure. I'm very interested in this because I've had this. I've wondered this. It's like, OK, the computer guys, I got a lot of those at the meetup. I kind of get that. You only listen to so much music. You want something to keep your mind occupied. That's the way I consume. You know, today I was going through some verveky stuff, folding my laundry, you know? And it's like, folding my laundry? I don't need my head to do that. You know, so. But then the artists, I was thinking, why the artists? So, OK, so I think it's twofold. All right. One is it's interesting content. And it's subject matter that I think most people are thinking about it, whether they're calling it, you know, meaning making or the exploration of meaning, whether that's true or not. When we're watching film, when we're... Everything we engage in regularly, that we engage in by choice, video games, books, all these stories that we get involved with. I know that you talk a lot about story making too, but all of that stuff is an exploration of getting at this non-physical thing we think of as meaning, right? It's... We can use the term metaphysical, but all this stuff gets kind of loaded, and people fudge with it, as you say, right? But the bottom line is it's non-physical. And we don't know how to really define and solidify those things that are non-material or non-physical for us. And so, I think that as designers and illustrators and artists, and the reason why you're having these people gravitate is because we do two things. We pull meaning out of things, right? But everybody does that to some degree. And then we imbue meaning into things. And so, with Peugeot, we talked about symbolic objects, subject matter. But with design, and when you're building art and design, you're actually thinking about... And some of this stuff will sound familiar to you, probably from just from your high school education or something, but we have formal elements and principles of design. And so, elements are those things that are phenomenologically in the thing, in the phenomenon itself. So, a painting, a sculpture, your computer monitor, the reason why you love the way that Mac computer is designed, all those traits are line, shape, space, and color. They're the things you can point to, and it's not subjective. Like, whether a thing is red is not subjective. Whether a thing is a rectangle or a square or a circle is not subjective. And by and large, people look at these things that are not in the creative fields, and they just think, well, this is totally subjective. And that's not the truth. It's some subjective, like everything else in reality, right? And it's some completely objective. And there's a weaving of these two things. And so, I would argue that the vast majority of people who are in art and design are all touching on this concept of making meaning and how they do it. For me, it's really, it's almost formulaic. I use a certain type of line, I'm going to communicate something, right? I use a certain type of shape, I'm going to communicate something. So, if I say to you, I want to create an image that is for romance, right? What color am I going to use, Paul? Red. Red. How did you magically know that? Amazing, isn't it? It's phenomenal, right? So, if I want to say sex, passion, romance, lust, I'm going to use the color red, right? And you know that because there's this cultural bank of knowledge that you're tapping into, that you're going to be able to read that, right? Now, obviously, if I say calm or something, you'll probably say blue, right? Maybe green, but probably blue, right? That's what comes to mind for you, right? And then if I pivot back and I say, okay, if I want to communicate anger, violence. Probably red or black. Red, yeah, red again. Amazingly, it pops up. So, what we do is we, how do you differentiate then visually between violence and anger and lust and passion and romance and sex? How do you differentiate those things? Well, what we do as visual communicators is we go in and we tweak the meaning of the color with another element. So, remember, we have like lines, shapes, textures, spaces, all of those other elements that we deal with, we can use those to tweak and modify what you get out of the color. The same exact red can communicate romance that communicates violence. It's just a matter of what kind of line. If I use it like a curvy, curvaceous line that has a variable stroke weight that's thick and thin, you're going to think more feminine, more, and of course, obviously, the hardcore feminists get all mad when you say that, but for the love of head and that, it's just a way of communicating. It's not degrading anybody, you know? That's right. It's just a way to communicate. And that's the other side of that too, that whole communication angle. That's what we're doing. And if we're making design, movies, books that are meaningful, it's just a way to connect from this guy to that guy, this girl to that girl, whatever. It's just a way to connect that non-physical thing through some physical thing. Does that make sense? Yeah, absolutely. So, we modify, basically, we modify meaning by virtue of other elements. I think that what you guys are all talking about and what Verve keeps talking about, all of that stuff relates. It just relates in kind of a more philosophical, word-oriented way than what these other folks, these art folks, these design folks that keep getting attracted, they're using that to help with what they're doing. At least, that's what I think I'm doing, and I think maybe that sheds a little bit of light onto why they're tapping in so hard, why you're having so many of these folks. That does, that does. That makes real sense. I hadn't really thought of that. I can't wait to see some of the comments. I want to see if I'm tapping at anything or if they're just like, no, Gary, you're totally screwed up. No, I think you're right. And because pastors are communicators, as are college professors, and Peterson and Verveki both are very popular teachers. And to be a popular teacher, you need to not only have some really good ideas, but you also need to be able to communicate it. And that usually takes, that's representation, that's presentation. Of course, pastors, we are further along the scale of communicators than necessarily idea creators. Right, that's right. That's right. And you have to be like, it's part of the part of the gig, right? Yeah, yeah. You're bad at it. You're bad at it. Those are the guys who are never the favorite teacher. No, no. And they don't know why. Got all these great ideas. Well, nobody wants to listen to you because you're boring. You can't relate it to reality and stuff. Yeah. Right. I don't teach college anymore. I do user experience design now, but I've taught for a lot of years. And to me, it took a while for those things, even after I started teaching, for some things started to gel, and to be able to say, okay, these are the mechanics of how it works. And there is this, I used to tell my students for years that what we're always going for when we're making things for meaning is that epiphany moment, that connection. And we experienced that. Everyone's familiar with it because we experience it when we hear a good pastor or rabbi or a politician even. But we hear them say something that we know somewhere in our gut is true. It's right. It's like they've actually got it. They've got the concept down. And when they do that, the reason why we have that feeling of certainty and that yes sort of reaction is because they put in more concrete terms something that was previously merely felt or empathized with or something like that. It was some sort of ambiguous thing. And so they clarify it, and it just crystallizes force in our minds. So we respond really well to that. I think that you and Hervé P. and Peterson are doing exactly that thing. There's words that are coming in that people are able to ground themselves and sort of attach to and go, I knew this was accurate. This was right. But there were never words for it before. So I either pushed it aside, ignored it, or it just itched my brain. It's just that. Right. Right. And so I guess that dovetails a little bit into what Peterson's doing. I get the impression that you right now are thinking that Peterson sort of had a moment and will he have another moment or is it kind of subsided or what? Like, is that where you're at with it? Yeah, I wonder. Well, and part of the problem is that I'm on the bleeding edge of this. And so what you recognize is that there's whole lots of people out there who are continuing to discover Jordan Peterson and they are continuing to have their moment. Peterson's own chaos order thing. Once you've internalized enough Jordan Peterson, then you start looking to feed along the edges again. So a whole bunch of early adopters found him early and you've got that normal curve of early and late adopters. And so that wave sort of goes through. But Jordan isn't putting out new stuff. He's, you know, I found I listened to a lot of the content all that I could in terms of his book tour and I tended to find those talks a little bit rote and familiar. And I've talked to some people who've been listening to Jordan Peterson for 20, 25 years. And they say it's all the same stuff he's been talking about forever. And now he's been in a little different context. And so some changes of context to add some new interests. So but then the question is the question will be, you know, if he goes into Exodus, see part of, well, you know, so part of what I've also done is pastor training. And so and so I'm too, by the way. I go to a church here in Savannah that's 250 years old. OK. So so what's fun when you train when you train laypeople and preaching, a lot of the people who are interested in lay preaching, they've got a sermon that they're working on and they've got a sermon that they wanted to preach. So you basically help them get that sermon out there and boom, and they get their sermon out there. And for a lot of them, it's like. Well, I do now. I've been 10 years sitting on this egg. And part of how the Bible functions is that the Bible is this massive, very fertile thing that when you intersect with it, stuff comes out. And so the fact that Peterson had such a valuable and volatile interaction with the Bible makes perfect sense to me because the Bible has been doing that forever. That's right. Even the atheist. Yeah, there's something. There's some reaction. And so it's like, OK, you're not Jordan. You're probably not going to do anything very interesting until you go back to the Bible and start talking about Exodus. And then there might be some interesting stuff there. But until then, we're all sort of waiting. And we'll see. I think his wife's illness is the stutter. I don't think it's that he's exhausted. I don't know. That's what I was kind of thinking that maybe you're into. But I don't think that's now that you said that. No, no. I think you're exactly right. When when you're I mean, he and his wife are close. Yeah, she traveled with him everywhere. Right. And that doesn't happen unless these two are really, really close, because she sets aside everything to be with him on this whole journey. So then when she gets ill, that's huge for them. And so the fact that I mean, the last. I mean, for anybody who's been married any of the time, for anybody who loves their spouse, genuinely, you know, like, yeah, of course, of course. So it'll be it'll be interesting to see. There's a lot of pessimism about what this next book is going to be. And I share some of that that he gave us. So he's got 40 tool. He's got 42 rules. He gave us the top 10 or the top 12. And so there might be two or three kind of helpful ones in the next batch. But we're going to there's going to be a diminishing return. He should have written 12 rules for death. That would have been more fun. Wow. That's a that's a little interesting topic right there. So but but anyway, we'll see. It could be that there's another gear. You just don't know what these things. We would have expected the first one. So I'm you know, I'm I'm like everyone else waiting for the next. What's what's what's the dude going to do? My fear has also been, though, that you I mean, hierarchies bind and blind. And once once I mean, I've even experienced this in my own little channel. I really appreciate talking to people who aren't, in a sense, fans, because then they'll kind of they'll just tell me, Jordan Peterson's full of crap and then you're full of crap, too. That doesn't bother me at all. I frankly love it. Yeah. And so I get I get I get informed by that. That's actually part of why I'm I'm a lifelong lover of Peterson now. Like there's no because what he's done, he and you asked this at one point or you were talking about this at one point, maybe a few months or maybe the summer or something like that. I forget exactly. But but one of the things that he's done is he's he's knocked down the barrier of pride for for many of our atheist friends. It's obviously true by the by the number of people who credit him with them going to church, so whether they were like Joe, for instance, who's brilliant and wonderful to listen to, because he's so refreshingly, beautifully honest, you know. But there are other folks like that. They don't they're not sure where they stand as far as their belief, but they know that something more is going on. They're willing to engage the whole question more. So I'm really grateful for he's tamped down a lot of hostility between these groups. And the conversations are more fun. They're more fun with our atheist friends who are open to us. And and when we open ourselves that that same way, it's the conversations are more fun. And I think we progress someplace. Yes, it's better for for us as theists and specifically as Christians. But also for them as atheists. Suddenly, we're not we're not enemies, but we're we're on this. We're trying to figure something out together, a puzzle that's that's more communal, more open. It's not it's not the travesty we see in the political realm these days. It's so ludicrous for the other guy has to be the bad guy rather than the other guy having the bad guy. We can be able to say, hey, let's steer it this way. We argue about which way to steer it. But he's not a bad guy because he wants to steer it a little bit to the right of the iceberg. That's right. That's exactly right. And that I think I think you really nailed it. That's that's been a real problem between Christians and atheists. And it's a real problem with a lot of the material that's been presented by the celebrity atheists and the celebrity Christians and apologists. That material, I just find boring. Yeah. And and I think you're like real death. Yes. And we're having the same thing in politics now, which is, OK, so he's a socialist. Well, now we know that what else is new? Let's talk about this. And are so he likes grabbing women. OK, we know that. Well, let's keep talking about this. And I actually saw it. Condi Rice was on one of the Sunday morning shows. And she said, you know, all this yelling, you know, you're a racist. That's just an attempt to shut a conversation down. That's the wrong strategy. We should be opening. So, OK, maybe he's wearing a maybe he's wearing robes. And, you know, and maybe he's a Klansman. OK, well, what are you going to do then? Stop talking to him. That's exactly who you should talk to. I think the options that we're giving each other right now, culturally, are are just murder that guy. Yeah. Right. Like that's where it seems like we're heading when the reality is, I don't want that for either side. You know, exactly. We passionately on a lot of the guy that you talked with today, Jeff Q. Yeah, that was so much fun. I knew people were going to hate it. Oh, I disagree with the guy on so many things. But the conversations, a good conversation to have to really it's with a good person to have it with. Yeah, he's obviously not stupid, right? He's not dumb. Right. But but opening the door, opening the conversation, what's I don't see like there's nothing but good that comes of that. There's nothing good. And there are obviously there are places where we draw the line. We say, I'm not going to I'm not going to entertain your conversation because it's just it's too far. But we're we're drawing that line further and further away from ourselves these days. And that's really not that's not a good way to go for anything. I mean, the guy today said something about he doesn't want to live under laws or something that under a structured moral law. All laws are moral, man. Like murders, murders are legal because it's not moral. You know, there's no reason to put a law on not stealing if it's not if it's moral to do it. Right. So they're all they're all fundamentally at the root. We can argue that they're they're all moral. We may disagree on how moral or what's really moral, what's not. But then we're arguing about what the law is, not we're not arguing what a law is. A law is a law is keeping us to some degree or another in some sort of moral constraint. So even though there are many people like that, I disagree with plenty. But I want to hear from and the other thing is. I learned from those folks, you know, I mean, like. And my boss, I adore my boss. He's a great guy, man. And we disagree politically, all kinds of stuff. And and it's good because it helps me to to change whatever I need to change and reorient. That should be a good thing. It's one of the things I wasn't a fan of John Kerry when he ran for president. Right. But I thought it was really ludicrous that they called the guy a flip flopper. And his explanation didn't didn't come out nearly as much as the flip flopper thing where they throw flip flops at him and stuff. But but he was just like, what kind of moron does it change over their lifetime? You know, that was a good response. You know, it's a really like he was absolutely right. Like over your life, you should not hold the same position that you did when you were 19. You know, like that's a that's a pretty reasonable thing. You know, tweets mean you may. It's it's also reasonable for you if you're very liberal to to generally hold a liberal stance your whole life. Sure. Or conservative and generally conservative stance. But to have all the same positions on all the same issues. That's probably not much growth and probably not much. You probably read much. You probably didn't have good conversations with anybody who challenged you the least. And that's not fun to me. That doesn't sound like the like the kind of conversations I would. No, I agree. 100 percent. I agree. 100 percent. Then so and it's been, you know, it's so having a YouTube channel has just been a fascinating experiment in that because it's just it's just to me, people are just incredible. And you'll do it. You'll do a video and folks will kind of say the usual things along the lines that they have the same comment to all of your ideas that they tend to have. And they'll yeah. Well, besides that. And that's cool because, you know, you get to see perspectives. And then sometimes someone will come out with another comment that you read and it'll be just like, wow. And and and you know, it's interesting, too, in terms of time, when my channel was just new, that I think there was more diversity in the comments. And and that could be just the chaos order thing that now more and more territory is mapped for me. So now I, too, am feeding further afield. But in a Christian dynamic, I mean, and again, that's part of a that's part of a religious landscape that there are certain people for whom. Well, our Lord changes not. And so therefore we ought not either. It's kind of like, well, we're also sinners. So if you're if you're a lot like the Lord to begin with, maybe you don't change a lot. I feel most of us are. I I got to feel at least I'm not right. Maybe those guys are. But that's right. So I wouldn't think I wouldn't be concerned with changing. But I'm I'm too dastardly. But it's it's fun. It's it's it's just been fun watching. I mean, again, I kind of got into this because I figured I'd have a handful of new conversation partners to talk about Jordan Peterson. I got way more partners than I thought I would. But that's been really cool. So I've I've just had fun with it. Yeah, it's it's actually really exciting to see when you run into new people on here and then, of course, the randos are now having the conversations. And so there's some great stuff in there, man. There's some really good jewels in those conversations. There is I got to I got to find I mean, there's now I've just got so much stuff to listen to, though, it's like, oh, yeah, competition is tough. Yeah. In terms of, you know, I've got maybe what an hour to a day to really devote to listening to something. Most days. And so it's what's going to be. And usually it's it intersects with, you know, what do I need in terms of if I want challenge, I listen to something that's complex. If it's I just don't have any more energy. I'll listen to something that's dumb. You know, it's or dumb or or dumber. But I've the most gratifying thing of the whole experience has been the proliferation of voices and conversations. The Randos channel, Mary's channel, Karen's channel, just watching these people do their own thing. And I don't have enough chance time to listen to all of it. But dipping in, it's it's so cool. And just, you know, meeting you today, too, it's there's so many amazing, smart, cool people out there and to keep meeting them day after day. It's just too much fun. We get to I mean, I think there's this watch this channel. We get to meet them by proxy. Right. So and it is it's really compelling to me, at least to see these people with these very different backgrounds coming at things from different angles. And Joe always comes to mind because he's hilarious to me. He's he's atheist and goes to church and seeking heart. It's just it's so endearing, man, because he's he's just so damned earnest. You know, it's just deeply earnest. And that's that's always sort of an attractive quality in somebody when they're when they're just just thoroughly honest and no pretense about it. And so, I mean, everybody has some pretense. You mean, by and large, man, he's just kind of laying it out there. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's also kind of encouraging to see. But there's a lot of folks that are like that. There's a lot of folks that you speak to that. They're just really interesting, man. Well, and this is this has always been something that I've I mean, part of what has been and and I completely understand why it's there in church culture where honesty, honesty, you risk status in a church culture with radical honesty in so many church cultures. And for me, that's what's been so much fun about non-Christians and that in many cases, unless it's a political thing, that's why political conversations are so boring. Unless it's a political thing, they'll just tell you what they think. And it's like, oh, thank you. And so many other people think that way, too. So and people, you know, in church, people are like, well, I want people in church to be more transparent. Well, you kind of do until you don't. I have this theory that like there's there's in fact, C.S. Lewis talks about it in in The Weight of the Lord, which is like a collection of essays. Yeah. And we talked about circles. These are these different rings of people who haven't read it. It's like social rings or something where you it's not exactly a clique. There's a there's a logic to it. And it's OK. If you understand really kind of what's going on, it's natural that people who have grown up in the church and if you're, you know, or wherever and you've been at your work for eight years to have a certain lingo and a certain connectedness, you know, of understanding with one another, those are natural sorts of things that happen. So I think that I think that that when you first go to a church, you see the outer shine, you know, the the or any any organization. But when you get deeper into it, you I think you do get some honesty, like after after some period of time. But it takes a little while. I go to a very traditional conservative, you know, reform Presbyterian church, you know, and I love it. It's just like right up my alley. It's great for me, but it's not for me. One of my closest friends in the world invited him to church one morning. He's like, no, I'm like, you don't have to iron your pants. Nobody really cares. He goes, Oh, I wouldn't worry about it. They'd be straight when I walk in anyway. Like, of course, just iron his pants for you, which I found absolutely hilarious, you know. But but I think that I think that that even though that's sort of the outer the outer look, the reality of when you get to know people, we're all messy, man. We're all we're all slobs under the t-shirt, under the skin. You know, that's what we're kind of we're a mess. You know, we have no but nobody's got it easy. Everybody's if you're 40 or above, something hurt you this morning when you woke up. You know, I don't care what shape you mean, great shape, man. But if you're 40 or above, when you woke up, something was hurting. Right. So you think about that, you know, the reality is that every person you're talking to, something's gone on. They had a they had a bad dad. Their parents didn't actually love each other and they were cruel to each other. Whatever it is, everybody's got baggage. And one of the things that your channel does in this whole conversation on meeting, when we start to open up to our to our our secular friends, our atheist friends, our our whatever denomination, you know, Christian friends, non-Christian religious people, theists, when we open up to these people, we begin to see that real sliver of humanity that is really common to us all, where we all we all connect on that. You know, something hurts when I wake up, whether it's your heart or your or your physical body or both or and everything in between. Yeah. Yeah. And so as we open this stuff up, as we get to talk about, I think we start to connect more in those things. And they're the more important things because you mentioned we talk a little about politics and stuff. We've gotten into a situation culturally and politically where the other guy is a bastard, like no matter what, no matter what. Just because he's on the other team. Right. He's just a rotten son of a gun. And and the truth of it is probably not that the truth of it is the other side probably has a good point. Right. So the Republicans want to characterize the Democrats as wanting to let all the freeloaders get all the free health care in the universe. Right. And and the Democrats want to want to characterize the Republicans as people who don't care about children who are dying of preventable diseases. Well, those are caricatures, you know, like those people don't on either side of that, don't really believe either of those things. You know, there's there's something in between there where we we want to make people be responsible for themselves. We want to be responsible and equip them to do that. And at the same time, make sure people aren't dying of preventable diseases. And there's somewhere in between there that I think all Democrats and Republicans are all like all the weirdest people on the ends. Or like, yeah, we can do this. Right. Like those are things that I can I can get I can I can agree with. You know, I think that's the reality of it. And I think these conversations, they dig more at that reality than do when we when we pick an issue like that. You pick that issue. I think you guys spoke about you and Jeff spoke earlier about about abortion or something. Yeah, I knew that gets them get some get some attention. What I found hilarious is is he thinks like kind of like everybody does on it in that if you just see it my way, it's OK. I mean, if you he's because he's like he's like, you know, you just see the the as a law. He's like, I think he's got a good point that he said right after that, which was we we need to be if we care about an issue like that for life people, then you what you do is you connect with people on on on a more moral and personal level rather than a political level. I think that is the better emphasis personally. I like I get what he's saying there. But his whole his whole trajectory of like, if you don't want to, you know, then whatever, you know, it's not it's not quite quite seeing the full picture, I think, you know. But of course, I would think that I come out with my baggage, right? We actually we actually at our meetup, our local meetup, got into an abortion conversation, really kind of surprised me because it came up because someone told a little story about something that happened at their their workplace. But, you know, and it's say, say, OK, so so isn't it isn't the case that that neither side really thinks that more abortions is a good thing. So could both sides start by agreeing that fewer abortions is a good thing? So then we can maybe and but start working towards that. But the problem is we do have a political system that knows that. And the same with gun control, the same with LGBT, the same with how many other issues that if I beat this drum, I'll get votes. And this is about winning. And so you have to get that. You have the polarization and it's like, OK, so this is good for your political party, but it's bad for the country. So maybe we should stop treating each other this way. My son, my son told me a story about something that happened in the North Carolina, the Carolina Legislature, a 9 11 that apparently the governor and had a thing, he was a Democrat, and a few Democrats in the in the state house were going to go to a thing that day. And and there was the budget and the Republicans knew they didn't have enough money to enough votes to pass the budget without a government veto. So they had a handshake agreement that they wouldn't vote on it that day because a whole bunch of people were there. And then they voted on it that day. And it's like, you know, that kind of stuff, that's what erodes the foundation of our ability to work together. And both sides do it. But it's it's it's it's like, you know, what for Jordan Peterson talks about. OK, you want to win that marriage argument? Great. Now you've won. How good is that? Because now you're looking at someone who's lost and maybe you should try to work this out. But then again, I'm a I'm a I'm a peacemaker and sort of a moderator, but I'm also a pot stirrer. So with some people mentioned because again, I put that I posted that I, you know, I was having that conversation with Jeff and Jeff's like, yeah, post this, post this. I'm like, oh, this one's going to be interesting on this channel because over time, communities develop and you get a sense for the group. And I thought, well, this pot can probably use a little bit of stirring and folks will get upset. But that's better than having them all sleep, I suppose. Yeah, I think it's fine. I think it's a good thing to do. I think that I mean, he seemed like a pretty open guy. He'll read it and take it and he'll be fine. Yeah. Oh, I don't think you'll even read the comments. I mean, he's he's, you know, again, in our in our physical meetup, we got a whole group of people that are like zero on agreeableness. And oh, yeah. So our meetups are just I mean, people will be that we don't do politics, but people will be debating. I mean, we had free conversations about free will way too many times. I've always been come up. Yeah. But but, you know, I I if if that can be within a realm where people keep listening, that's awesome. Yeah. Yeah. So keep growing. Yeah. Well, I think you guys are facilitating that. That's that's largely what's going on in these conversations. It amazes me the number of people that sort of that sort of cross pollinate in some of these. I mean, it shouldn't amaze me because I'm doing it. You know, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. You only got thinking like this, you know, but but it still is kind of interesting that so many of these same ideas and people give each other ideas. And there's some great stuff, great content you put out there that leads to some really excellent places, I think. And conversations, the conversations in your thread are really amongst my favorites because by and large, there's really goodwill. And there's not a lot of like just petty math. There is occasionally, right? There's some of the crap because because we're because we're messy human beings. But but it's nice to see that by and large, it's not a bunch of pettiness and and nastiness and stuff. Yeah. And why stay if if, you know, and sometimes there'll be someone in the comments section that every video is just just upset and angry. And it's like, I don't understand why you're still here. That click on something is it that much? Is that hard to move the mouse? But then deep inside, you know, they got something they're working through. So, OK, you keep keep keep pouring that stuff in. And as long as there are lines that I will draw eventually. But for the most part, hopefully you'll get it worked out. And we've seen that in the Discord server because some people came in there just kind of, you know, a little bit nasty. But especially once they began the culture of it, you know, then people feel a little out of sorts when they're not using their real name. And once they start using at least their first name, now they've got skin in the game. Now they're not going to be a jerk and not have that look in the mirror and say, I've been a jerk. And so I've I've found I mean, that gets into the Internet and anonymity. And, you know, and then, you know, you know, where we started out talking in terms of, you know, I really like how you talked about the lines and the colors. I mean, there's there's reality that's going on here. And if we can, you know, get a little less anonymity, a little bit more face to face. That's part of the reason in this channel that for most of the people with whom I've been speaking, I want our first conversation to be about, OK, you got to you got to put some skin in the game. You got to know what's your name. Tell me some of your story, because once you put yourself out there a little bit. OK, now we're all now we're all skin to skin and skin, you know, skin can get hurt. A little more tender. That's right. So maybe now we'll talk face to face and we're not just going to, you know, flame each other in text. Right. Right. Yeah, I think it's yeah, it's much harder once you once you hear someone's voice and you hear their intent and see their face. All of those kinds of things. It's much harder to just be a turn. Right. I used to I taught I taught for four years on ground in Atlanta. And then I taught online for years. And and one of the things that I started doing, I was an early adopter of using voice and video feedback. And it immediately changed the mood of things, because when you do what I do, which is design work and everything, you're taking things that people make. Right. And that's like you birth that just like you write a book and you're and people get sensitive about that. Yeah. And so if you write to someone this, you know, it's not working because the lines, the shapes are speed are communicating different concepts. Your lines are curvy and feminine and your shapes are masculine. And you need to get this different feel, whatever, whatever the criticism is. It's always ugly or in tight. It's always like we're inside. But if you see me looking at you and saying it's not working because whatever, then there's something about seeing the face, seeing the eyes, hearing the voice, hearing the inflection. You know that I'm not being a dick to you. I'm actually someone who cares about your well-being and wants to see you succeed. And that's a whole different message. This sucks. This sucks. And I don't give a crap about you is a whole different message than this sucks. I want you to be better. That's a whole different concept. And it doesn't come through if you're just typing in words too frequently. So that's part of like generally I try. I'm always successful at this. I decided a few years ago to just do this, to just give the benefit of the doubt right off the bat, just assume the best intention from almost everyone. I heard you have a comedian, Louis C.K. Yeah, yeah. I heard him say something in some interview one time about how you get older and you get you either get crustier and you get more hard shell or you get softer and you know, and you know, more wishy washy. I thought even before that, I thought, you know, I'm already conservative enough. I don't need to get a crusty shell of conservative. I hate those other guys. I don't need to be that. That's not. And if I think back to the nature of who I am anyway, I like people more than I like my being right, more than I like my ideas anyway, really. I enjoy their company and I enjoy getting to know new people and learn things about them. Anyway, it's just the fundamental nature of who I am. And so I made a conscious decision not to go the crusty route. Yeah. Yeah. Well, and I agree 100 percent. It's. And people, people are a pain in the neck. I mean, I know as a pastor, I know that, but I also know that they're amazing. Yeah. And they're both. And so if you really want to elicit the good things out of them, well, that usually takes a little bit of forgiving, a little bit of overlooking, a little bit of, you know, patience. And I've seen many people, I've seen there've been very few people that I couldn't one way or another, you know, pull a little bit, pull them a little bit out and say, OK, and I'm I'm not here to hurt you. I'm, you know, generally speaking, I'd love to bless you. Let's, you know, let's, you know, and they'll curse me or something. It's like, OK, you know what a curse. Let's, you know, let's keep going. The truth of that is that is that you having that attitude and that disposition, it blesses you. It's just it's just that you're not diminished by it. You're actually enhanced personally in your own life. Especially to nonbelievers, man, they're probably, you know, listen to this. They listen to this and just go, holy moes, like this is a bunch of crap. You know, but there's there's truth in it. You're not diminished when you when you when you treat people with a sense of generosity, just have a gracious manner about it. Assume the best in them. You're you're so much less likely to be offensive and they'll forgive you when you are or when you're just outright wrong or stupid. They tend to be a lot more forgiving of it. And so it's a it's a coping mechanism. It's a it's a mechanism for receiving blessing yourself and for being a blessing to others. No one is ever angry for being gracious to them. They don't ever hate you for being gracious. Every now and then there there is so I mean, there's always an exception. And there are people and I I there are some people in this little Internet community now that I'll they'll say something nasty to me and I'll be gracious to them. And the thing is, I know that that's happening. It's so the worse they get, the more I'll get. And that just drives them crazy. But it's fun. But you're exactly right. And I actually think people might say, well, Calvinists, Calvinists are supposed to believe in total depravity. We do. But we also and I think this is we also believe that finally at the helm of the universe is an enormously gracious is an enormously great as an enormously gracious God that would go to the lengths of giving his own son for the redemption of this world. And if and if that if if if that is who is at the helm of the universe. Well, then why not be generous and optimistic and giving that that just to me is like I've got more liberty to do that than Brett Weinstein, because he thinks it's up to us to save this thing. And I'm thinking, boy, if it's up to us, we're really screwed. Yeah, I find I find Brett obviously, man, that guy's a genius. He's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. Well, many of these guys are just it's it's wonderful to hear him talk. I love to hear the guy talk. Me too. But I find it hilarious that he that he he's like we have we basically come up with something else. What is that something else? What what is that something else, man? Like you're you're you can't even you can't even conceive of it without without talking about the things that already exist. And the other thing the guy from today was talking about how how Christianity and Judeo-Christian things don't permeate into our society the way that that Peterson sort of supposes. But he's wrong about that. It's it's. That sounds so negative. I think he's missing some things. We put it that way. Maybe he's not completely wrong. He thinks the Judeo-Christian is is is the we have a labeling difficulty to figure out what exactly because we don't know. But what exactly we know that these are special societies. We know that the world is trying to get to places like the United States and England and Western Europe. That tells us something. The world is acting as if these are the best ways to live. Now, how to label that, I don't know. But that's clear. Well, all right. So and it's deeply tied to Christianity, which comes from Judaism. So I don't you know, that's that's that's exactly the relationship that I think that people are referring to is it is. Yeah, that's exactly it. But the we have a church. There's a there's a friend of mine who is a he's an architectural historian. He's taught this Sunday school course for a few quarters over the years that been there. And actually, he teaches at one of the local colleges here, Savannah College of Art Design. And he's taught this wonderful course on on the history of architecture and how it relates to Christianity. And literally, our cities are laid out, particularly on the East Coast. DC is laid out because of the way because of the way churches are. Even even things like the way we walk around the city. You can't overstate the invisible impact of such a thing as how you move through a city being literally the way squares are. If you ever look at a map of Savannah, Georgia, there there's a grid of squares that that things are lined around. But there are especially up and down the East Coast and in Europe, they're ordered according to churches, really, according to how to get to church and where life is centered around these things. And you you don't just you don't just have that and it have no impact. If you if you really break down right down to the shape of our doors, the shape of our archways, the crenellations on a given building. So much of of culture is permeated with with these things that the meaning is everywhere for us. It's all over. It's all over our writing. I made a comment today on that same video about have you read Benjamin Weikers book? Ten books that screwed up the world and five more that didn't help. No, that's not a great book. It's a quick read. It's awesome. It's so much fun. It's not bad. It's like I liken it to to Francis Schaeffer's How Should We Then Live? Francis Schaeffer's How Should We Then Live is it's more intellectually dense and it's big, right? It's like it covers lots of things. But he's just covering these books. He talks about how these books impact each other and how they impact our thinking today. And he's not even says, I think in the form where it's been a while since I've read it. But he says in the beginning, like I'm not a fan of banning books. I don't want you not to read them. Read them, but understand the impact they've had. Like know what's going on for these books. It's well worth your time. And it's a short. I'll have to look at it. It'll be a quick read for you. Like it's probably 160 pages or whatever, but it's really great insights and stuff like that. How do I get off of that? I'm sorry. It's well worth your time. I think it's just a great title. It's the best title. It's a fantastic title. Ten books that screwed up the world and five more that didn't help. To be from New Jersey. That's a title I can get into. That's hysterical. Yeah. Oh, fun. It's an audio book too. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's just when you got to, I think you'll enjoy it. It's fun. I heard him and his editor give a, I think it's an editor, my publisher, give like a lecture on C-spending time. And then I picked up the book right after that. So this is probably six or eight years ago or something now. But it's anyway, it's all fun. It's worth reading. But it's like for people who wouldn't want to read something as dense as how should we then live. It's a good sort of entry level kind of a kind of, it's not, it's not dumb. It's not super dumb or anything. But it's not that same level of rigor that it takes to get through Francis Schaeffer. You know, it's a different level of intensity to it. Yeah. The Francis Schaeffer, I, it's so funny because when I try and read a Francis Schaeffer book, so much of it is so familiar to me because I was just so steeped in reform doctrine. It's kind of like, oh, that's, that's, it was just that too much map territory, not enough new territory, but. That's interesting because I didn't grow up in the church. So for me, Francis Schaeffer was illuminating, man. Just, just blew me away. I had a friend who, a friend who I read, I read How Should We Then Live, I think first. And I was just going on about how, how great it was and how, how interesting it was for me and revolutionary it was. And so, and he really wanted a copy. So I got him a copy of it for Christmas or something. And I was like, I'm going to read it. I got him a copy of it for Christmas or something. And, and like two months later, he's like, I can't read this on the toilet. I'm like, dude, I never told you you can read it on the toilet. It isn't light reading. Francis Schaeffer is not toilet reading, you know? That's funny. Maybe it's the only place he reads. The only place he can get any peace. Maybe. Oh, that's funny. Well, we got a few more minutes. Anything else? Anything else you want to talk about? This has been fun. I have, I think I've eaten your ear off too much and I've probably spoken too much already, so I'll let you go. I know you have another call soon. I'll give you some time. Do I, do I have your email address? I don't know. I think you do. I haven't seen it. Well, if, just, just send me, just shoot me an email just in case so that I'll know for sure that I've got your email. Cause I don't always, I can, I think I can harvest it from the calendar every now and then with, with certain things. It's kind of hard to harvest. So anyway, if I, I'll, I'll, actually, if I don't have it, if I can't get back to you, I'll just leave a note in the comment section for you cause you're, you're very easy to find. So thank you, Gary. This has been tremendous and I will definitely send this to you. All right. Great. It's been a lot of fun. Yeah. Thanks. Talk it to you. You too. See you. Bye bye.