https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DaaDihjp0gM

 to you. Hi, this is Paul and following up on the sex talk that we had a couple of days ago with Sam and Laura and I've asked a group of individuals who have different opinions on this. Apparently, usually I see how about how many comments you have with certain number of views for that for that video comments way outstretched views. And so this is going to be an interesting conversation today. Some of these people need more introduction than last most of them not much because they've all been on the channel at least once. Some of them have been on live streams a number of times. Kale is still figuring out his tech. Michael was was working on his tech. And so we'll we'll see how this goes. Luke, why don't you give a little introduction about yourself? Okay. I've been I was a fairly early rando. I don't know when I started interacting with Paul. Like most people I got in on the after the year initial video about Jordan Peterson. I was heavily involved early pre discord and post discord for a while and I've been less involved recently but I broadly follow things. I've had long standing relationships with a lot of people in the community. So I'm around. I want to know who told you this was going to happen because I got an email from you unsolicited. Was it Laura or was it Sam? You guess. Both of them. It was Sam. But Laura probably would have sent me an email too. See hierarchy has its privileges. So Luke Luke will definitely have opinions. Laura, you were there for the first one. Anything you want to say to. I don't know if anyone watched the first video. They've they've heard enough of me. Okay. Part of part of what's interesting about Luke here is Luke was a John Piper disciple and John Piper desiring God. Luke is from Minneapolis went to John Piper's church. So I thought and then he went of course orthodox and you want to hold up that book that your priest said you should read before participating in this. And did you finish your homework? No. He just dropped it off this morning and I've been busy. But unfortunately it's out of print. And so you know what are you going to do? We all need to get the last few copies on eight books and read it and then have another discussion probably. Okay. Well I'm sure we will have follow up discussions in the future on this trip. Trip has been a regular on the channel prep trip brought promised to bring the Puritan thunder into this conversation because the Puritan Scott special mention trip. Why don't you say a little bit about yourself. Yeah. So yeah my name is trip. I I've been around for a while not as long as Luke has on the channel. But Sam Sam also like mentioned that that maybe this would be an discussion that I'd be interested in. I I you know in terms of theology I did attend reformed theological seminary in Charlotte. And then I also I went to Mars Hill. So Sam Luke and I like share a kind of a common like young restless reformed kind of background in that. And I grew up in the Presbyterian Church and now I'm an Anglican and very much a Puritan stand. So for sure. Okay. Thank you. Trip. Moises Pacheco is a another Christian reform minister besides myself. Moises is planting a church in inner city Chicago. And Moises used to teach sex ed. And Moises is also on CRC Voices and he often brings thunder on CRC Voices. Why don't you say a little bit about why you want to participate in this Moises. Yeah. So about 10 years ago I worked for a hospital in their community education department specifically dealing with sex education and diabetes education. I was more the sex education guy of that department. And so I have spoken to thousands of public school students teachers administrators about this topic. I've looked at a lot of the relevant studies at that time as I also spoke to a lot of other educators from perspectives on sex sexuality mostly in the public domain. So not necessarily in the form of theology or the church setting. So trying to navigate my perspective on sexuality which is rooted in my theological framework but arguing that without any religious import. So I've been talking about sex for a long time. All right. And Michael Martin who I've only had on the channel once I'm going to be appearing with Michael in Washington D.C. at the end of July. Michael was also mentioned sort of brought in by Nate. Nate is probably going to come in when he gets the opportunity. Michael why don't you. Well and I plugged his book in the talk too. That's true. Michael struggling with his Internet connection. Well we'll run over to Kale who was struggling previously. That's why he's lost. Kale's become a regular here on the Friday the Friday morning live streams. Kale do you have any interest in this topic. A little bit. A little bit. OK. OK. Now Kale feels kind of bad. He's been sort of pegged as the Catholic guy when when he says he's really the classic story guy. So we're actually working up a conversation between him and Dr. Jim on stories because they're both they're both really good on stories. So yeah I don't mind being the sort of the sort of Catholic guy but I my first interest in love is a story and in that direction and not necessarily politics. But anyway the first things first I just want to say I I really really enjoyed the conversation with you and Sam and Laura like really amazing. And I even listened to it twice if you can believe that. And I loved it because it really really got me to think. And so I appreciate that. Just first. OK. Well thank you. Well Michael's Michael's still sorting out his sound. I suspect it's probably a combination of Internet and sound. So we'll he'll he'll jump in once he gets that all sorted. Who would like to begin? Who's got some opening comments based on the conversation that they'd like to like like to say something right off the bat. I one of the things is we've got so I there are there are a number of comments from the Quest for Spiritual Life Conference where people are complaining that there were no Roman Catholics on stage. And so ever since the conference my my my stream has been very Roman Catholic heavy and just given the number of Roman Catholics in the United States and in this conversation. Yeah there's a lot of Catholic influence. Paul just a quick question. You know I don't know how much you know about you know this little corner like if you if you have any kind of demographic slice of that. But I mean how many people in your audience or in this audience you know are like me or Catholic. I don't have any statistics. Which is that's good. I sense could be as much as a quarter. OK. At least a quarter who are currently Roman Catholic or grew up Catholic. OK. OK. Michael you think you got things sorted yet or how's it going. Like he's still sorting. OK. I'm going to I'm going to I'm going to put him in the in the room. Luke you just popped in. You're always good with a thought. First thoughts on the conversation that you watched of ours. Man I so well I sent a bunch of them to Sam and trip already and Sarah. We have a little chat but I yeah I thought the conversation was also very wonderful. I guess you know I'm I'm definitely a convert to orthodoxy so I can't speak to orthodoxy and even beginning to read this book it says you know there is no the orthodox perspective in the preface he says something like that you know like I'm going to give it is in no sense a statement of the Eastern Orthodox position on either sexuality or marriage. It is because the lack of a definitive synthesis of a theology of sexuality with an orthodoxy. But that's just kind of orthodoxy doesn't have a they're not big on systematics you know like the West. That's just not really their thing. And so I can't really speak to that. So I don't have a lot of facts but I definitely have ideas about all of it. You know I think it is interesting how I think the context and from what my pre said the context of the West is obviously very Augustinian and very stemming out of a response to the sexual milieu of the time in which the fathers were responding in such an extreme way. But but my broad understanding is that within orthodoxy it's not it wouldn't really be construed as being nearly as sex negative. But that's yeah. Well Laura why don't why don't we probably some people are coming in and they didn't watch the video. Where did this conversation arise and why. I mean you and you and I touched on things before you and Sam for a while had said we should do a conversation about this. It sounded really good to me. So how did this arise and how did it arise. Well you talked about it in Chicago group. Oh in the Chicago. Yeah well for me personally it arose out of a sense that Catholics were somewhat lying to ourselves about what our history with regard to attitudes towards sexuality has been and that we just kind of pretend it's always been what it is now. And so that's kind of something I've been chewing on for the past couple of years. And then for Sam it it arose out of his study of patristics and his his desire to get close to the early church and have more of a feel for what it would have been like in the early church. And he and then he was just really surprised by what he encountered there. And so he's been chewing on it as well. OK. Hello asks trying to understand what sex positive negative is. I skipped the video with Laura going to watch it later. Anybody Laura you can start here but anybody else wants to chime in. My short explanation is that there's this idea that if you're trying to level up in the spiritual life which everyone should be doing every time you have sex you're going to take a few points of damage if you like D&D metaphors. Whereas the the positive current view is oh God made sex and he designed it to be in marriage. And even though this is a fallen world you can still get a lot of good out of it and it's still conducive to holiness and it can it can be really wonderful and something that you can learn useful spiritual lessons from. That wasn't something you heard so much in the old days. And also like maybe a good example is in the old the the older the older sources are all constantly saying sex is permissible in marriage but it is not for lust. It is for children. It's for procreation and that's always the juxtaposition. It's not for lust it's for children. If you listen to people who were brought up in the 20th century or the 21st they will often say things like sex and marriage isn't for lust it's for communicating love to another person. But you're not going to hear that before the 20th century from any Catholic source I've ever read. So you're just going to it's going to be it's not lust it's children. Now now I'm going to bring in our Puritan here. Sam Sam mentioned and I think he had a point that in many ways the Puritans ironically because if someone is puritanical they're supposedly prudish. But Sam's argument was that you know the Puritans really brought this to the fore. They did. Yeah. And well and it started with Martin Luther you know in terms of this kind of explicit sex positive language like Martin Luther was kind of the first one that I'm aware of that ever kind of wrote like hey I really like having sex in my life. Like and he was he was he was that I mean that blunt about it right. So like it wasn't you know he's but in some ways he's reactionary obviously to the like you know going against the monastic lifestyle and vows of celibacy and those kind of things. But he's kind of the first ones and the Puritans just kind of took that and ran with it in some ways. So we call them prudish but in a lot of ways like compared to their time they like you could see hints of Christian hedonism or something like that in in what the Puritans were doing. But one thing that I wanted to bring up is it's not just such positivity versus negativity that you're going to find a lot of weird stuff in the early church. And I say weird because they were reacting to what was going on at the time. And I think that's one thing that Laura I talked to Sam about this but one thing that I wish that you guys you kind of threw a wet blanket on the Gnostic influence a little bit saying that that's overblown. And I think that that's I think there's truth to that. I think that we do over emphasize the Gnostic influence in a lot of the early church though like the like that area of the world was very much Hellenized. And so like the Gnostic influence was there I believe. But they were also they were also reacting to the culture of Greco-Roman sexual ethic that was really really libertine like or like they you could do things you could do things in the Greco-Roman world that we would look at and be like oh that's like it was all power based like it wasn't even necessarily homosexual heterosexual or anything else like that. It's all power masters had sex with their slaves. There was I mean I went to the the library at Celsius and there's literally there's literally like a path like a hidden path between the library of Celsius and the prostitution house across the street so that you could go in there and then get in. So like this was the world that there and there's like the cults of like Bacchus and Dionysus and that kind of stuff. So like there's a lot of stuff going on in the early church that they're reacting to. And so I think that that's one area that maybe we should talk about is whenever the church is reacting and prescribing things it's kind of like a doctor if it's a slight infection we might go with like you know like a lower dosage of antibiotic or something like that. But what you're going is is something really heavy and is could kill you then you're going to be a little bit more aggressive in your language around it. And I think that that's that we need to read them in light of what they're what they're reacting to in some ways. So I'll stop there. OK I like that. I'm going to bring Michael in for his introduction if he's got his thing sorted out then we'll get Kail in on the classical. Michael talk to us a little bit about your interest in this. Laura mentioned your book a little bit of background. Yes. Well this is a question I've puzzled about for a long time. And I wrote it and I wrote it actually I think when you talk you mentioned the book yesterday it was talking about my sex positivity in Christianity and what actually was marriage positivity that I was starting from. And I did my doctoral work in early modern English literature and in graduate school I wrote a paper on the way the song of songs was interpreted during the late Renaissance especially in England. And it's amazing that after the introduction of the printing press in England in the late fourteen hundreds I think one hundred and fifty versions of the song of songs came out in publication within within one hundred years even less. And it was it was a regular thing that came out. Now why is this right. Well and it's kind of funny the history of the song of song I mean it's the only book in the Bible that God isn't mentioned in except very very indirectly and there's nothing about the law. And anybody who would read the song of songs and not knowing where it was from would immediately say it's marriage poem it's an erotic poem you know it's a love poem it's a marriage song epithelium and but the history of the church is one of the same that shows how sinful you are that's not what it's about at all. It's allegory right. In fact I have in honor of you Paul the Geneva Bible and the introduction to an excellent song which was Salomon's in this song Salomon by most sweet and comfortable allegories and parables describe the perfect love of Jesus Christ the true Salomon and King of Peeps et cetera et cetera right. And it's interesting also I mean I grew up going to Catholic school and worked mostly at Catholic colleges most of my life and it's interesting that you know in Catholicism the archetype of the family that's presented to two boys and girls just like is the holy family right. The holy family Jesus Mary and Joseph right. And here's the thing if we accept the doctrine of the perpetual virginity of Mary then that was never a valid marriage according to Catholic theology okay. Catholic dogma right. And so what do we go with this and it seems to me we have a lot of conflicted messages that are sent and you were talking about this in the show you did the other day. In my position after thinking about this long and hard for many years is that when you have celibates making the rules it's just like academia academia it does. Academia creates an education system and it don't endage. And so the celibates are creating the system in their own industry. Obviously celibacy is the way to go right. And then you go to Mount Athos and women aren't allowed on the island and no female animals and it just is to be surreal. You know so I'm really interested in not excavating the patristic era because if you think about it in the patristic era those are the only reports we have are from the theologians and the bishops you don't have anything that was from the people on the ground right. You have interpretation just like it were the people in the bed pardon me. Right. Or the people in the bed. Do you. Well the people on the ground are not the people in the bed. I see what you're talking about yeah. Dad joke it's OK. It's OK. My. But even then. Yeah. I was going to say but even then we don't know what. Theologians would have said if he was in a very different culture right. Right. In a very different culture. Yes. Good. They're in practice and I think you can't I mean it's I mean is it not impossible for us to. To try to interject our own moment our own selves into that late antiquity. You know I think it works right. And well for me it's interesting and you mentioned Luther I think that it's like the first example of sex positivity in modern Christian right. And that and that makes a certain amount of sense right. I mean Luther is the first person whether whatever his intentions were to be a church leader and not be celibate right. So you know there's a practical reasons why he would argue for his army so to speak to become prolific and fruitful multiply there were real political implications for him to preach that message and you know I get it. I'm divorcing myself emotionally from the from the tenets of the Reformation and the counter Reformation. If I were Luther I would preach the same thing because you know you need troops. So I think there's a certain practicality to that. But but also you know I think the reason why you know you know Sam says he wanted to kind of go back to get sort of close to the original vision and then that's a sort of an interesting tendency and framework that is sort of worthy of interrogating as well. And I don't mean to interrogate it to torture it but just to sort of ask questions about the world. Why is the original always the best. I don't think it's quite that neat. But to your point Michael I think we go back not so as to sort of recreate in some sort of like romantic or nostalgic method of sort of recreating or repersonating the reality but rather what is the wisdom in that moment that might help us make sense out of what we're going through right now. Exactly. And what I was so much just one more thing when I was struck so much in listening to Laura and Sam and Paul talk originally is that you know Sam kept talking about you know the the the what did he call it was the original church or what was the phrase he used. Oh I don't remember. Going back to the ancient church or the you know but like which one are you talking about. Right. And I don't mean like Corinth or Philippians I don't mean it that way but you know what it seems to me when I read the New Testament you know very much thought that the the return was eminent right that that Jesus was going to return right. And so like I imagine you know sort of put myself in that head space if I thought that that you know the apocalypse was coming like soon ish like now ish. I'm not so sure I would recommend anybody like setting up shop and creating a home right. I know like if you know we all know that like having a family is going to be problematic if all hell is going to break loose. And so I think as soon as it became apparent that they were going to have to sort of hunker down and create communities that would extend both the space and in time I think that that opens way complicates the issue in in in real ways so that the arguments well it's better to be celibate I think are kind of that those are sort of very specific time and place arguments. And as soon as you realize your wife and family you're going to be generations into this. I think it changes the whole book. I thought about that too when listening to the conversation. I want to make sure Mike can land the plane and then I get to get Moisheisen. No I think you're exactly right Cale. In fact that's you made a point that Martin Heidegger makes in his his lectures on St. Paul I can't remember what the name of the book is but he talks about in his opinion I think he's right. Second Thessalonians was was written first and first Thessalonians written second. It means because in second Thessalonians there's a much more of an anxiety about the second coming really coming really quickly. And so in in Corinthians when when he says it's better you know to marry than to burn you know he's not he's he this is a guy who thinks it's going to happen pretty soon right. And it didn't happen pretty soon. Right. At least not the way he thought right. And I think like you said Cale that changes everything. And then I think in what we have now then it is almost in a 2000 year mistake about context. Yeah. And that's what I think when when being a eunuch for Christ right. When I think when I see that the history of the church and we don't even know what the church is by the way. The history of Christianity I think you come you start with a category category mistake and it never gets rectified. And I think you guys talked about it the other day. Laura I think you were talking about it with John Paul the second with the theology of the body. I think he was trying to issue a long overdue corrective to that to that really damaging anthropology. Yeah. You know and I think that's I mean I think when I think we were talking about Freud the other day too and Freud the reason he came to those conclusions wasn't just out of his head. He was actually talking to patients and how much you know a misinterpretation of Christian religion sexual ethics got screwed a whole bunch of people up. That's right. Right. All right. That's all. I'm going to bring Moises and then I think we're going to try and have some order to we got a big group and we're going to have to sort of work through this thing. So Moises your opening comments. So there were a couple of things I mean when I totally agree with Cale and Mike about the context and the return of Christ being imminent being a factor in do we just disregard Genesis 2 that God created man women and said for this reason a man shall live. So that's something way from the beginning that God ordained and initiated and I believe the context of the early fathers was part of the reason why they're like OK we don't need that anymore. I do believe that there's something a really important part of that Genesis narrative and that you know God creates woman from the rib of of Adam and then after that Adam says bone of my bone flesh of my flesh and says therefore a man shall leave his father's household and feed to his wife. And so there's this idea you know that was mentioned in the last video of sex having two purposes one reproduction true what happens if you can't reproduce. Well then there's the idea of intimacy but I think we we can't we too often try to connect intimacy with sex like sex is the intimacy. But the intimacy is the knowledge of the other and sexuality can be one way towards that intimacy but it is one way there are many other ways towards that intimacy and it's not just intimacy with another person because then you open the door for homosexual marriage and all kinds of other things but it is intimacy with our rib with a part of ourself with the part of ourself that's not in us anymore for me as a man I'm intimate with my wife because she's female she sees the whole world in another way and we have become one so that both our perspectives are all looks our outlooks on life are one and what the evangelical church has done with that intimacy and sexuality is well then it's okay to be a pervert as long as you're only a pervert with your wife. And that's kind of the opposite approach of sexuality is I'm not using my wife for some kind of self pleasure. What I'm doing is I'm becoming intimate with my wife in a certain form. I'm trying to to certainly understand her and in so much understanding her understanding part of myself that's missing and understanding what God has revealed through that if that makes sense. Okay I'm going to I want Cale to talk a little bit about the classical period and then let's ask the question is the Bible sex positive or sex negative. So I don't know Cale did you want to say something about the classical period. Well I mean I guess you know I everybody's heard this sort of stuff right especially this little corner. I mean I think Holland's point remains you know important and it's already brought up but I think the classical world the context out of which the church springs is is is sex saturated in such a way that we don't understand. We we in a weird way have lost the connection between freedom and chastity right. So that that that you know you read some of the ancient things even stuff all the way up to and including the Middle Ages which is really where I think the conversation kind of skipped over. No offense but that that you know the idea of being chased of choosing to be chased as an exercise of one's agency and autonomy so that to use use Sam's language to kind of level up spiritually or Laura I think you talked about that too. You know that is sort of an overlooked point and so we in our moment right now cannot even imagine that there's such a thing as a kind of liberatory move that does not involve sort of you know genital chaos right. That we just you know unless I can have sex with abandon or whatever it is this Christian hedonism thing that you all were talking about you know then then therefore it's like you're somehow being unfree and I think that is a weird inversion that we are blinded by our own eye rolling about the alleged sex negativity of the ancient church. I need I need to defend John Piper quickly because I'm not a type right anymore but how everyone is talking about Christian hedonism isn't Christian hedonism. OK I'm really more talking about the kind of Laura you you read the blurb on the Catholic book I'm talking about this sort of twenty first century like you know hold off until marriage but as soon as marriage happens it's all with it like champagne and bounce music or something you know fireworks. Yeah. So anyway that's really more what I'm talking about Luke so I don't I don't mean the strong man. I don't know this pipe like that's that's definitely the impression that you get from like the I guess dating goodbye type stuff. Well that was there and certainly part of the youth pastorish movement in the Catholic Church has sort of definitely tacked that way in the wake of theology of the body I think it's a little bit of a cartoonish version of the John Paul the Second's theology the body. That's basically the move right the move is to sort of embrace sex positivity and as if it's as if it's you know real. But anyway I don't. Don't you think some of this is an absolutizing of sex and conflating it with arrows. Sex is not arrows right like arrows is an is an absolute sex is not. All right. Anything else about. So is the Bible sex positive sex. Think about that. Well the whole Bible that's a big question right. So you've got the you've got Genesis is I mean good look God is absolutely obsessed with generation in the book we call Genesis I mean it's all about fruit right. And that's the whole point it's like have as many babies as possible like God is absolutely obsessed with this you know and I don't think that's an unavoidable you know if you're going to if you're going to take the Old Testament as sort of part of the show here and I think most of us do you know you can't avoid the fact that God is obsessed with sex. Yeah. The Old Testament is very positive about marriage and childbearing and there's not much there there doesn't seem to be much anxiety about whether your internal disposition while you're doing it is good or not. Right. I think there is trouble. Yeah. Onan gets in trouble. Yes yes but he took an action wasn't it wasn't about it wasn't about. Yeah. Well yeah I mean that story happens in a context and what he did wrong was that he did a certain action for a certain reason but it's not this like the Christian tradition is full of people. It's full of anxiety about your own motives and and and your whether you're being selfish or you know all this kind of stuff like I just don't see that literally. Yeah. You know all this kind of stuff like I just don't see that level of anxiety in the Old Testament. It's more like if you're if you're married and you're you're making babies you're doing the right thing and you're not maybe doing so much self analysis. You know for sure. Yeah. But Onan got in trouble because he was rejecting the mandate for fertility. Right. Right. And getting the enjoyment without the fertility. But it's also right. Well it was also obligated to provide. Right. True. Yeah it's a covenantal dodge. And God's not exactly obsessed with fertility and fecundity. Eros. We're talking about people in the desert. Right. Yeah. The ground that was almost impossible to. I'm a farmer. Almost impossible to grow anything out of the land of milk and honey. Right. So that's that's the miracle in a way is how do you take this barren waste. And make it fruitful. Right. Which is that's a theme throughout both the Old Testament and the New Testament especially with barren mothers right with with Sarah and then with Elizabeth right. And then who are blessed with fertility late in the game. Right. Yeah. That's some of those are important things. And that's why like I said I was I was not reading sex positivity in my book but marriage positivity because that's that's marriage is an image of the covenant. Right. I think that's the distinction marriage positivity versus because we keep trying to separate like isolate sex and sexuality out of marriage and then well what purposes can we derive outside of marriage. Well I don't think you can derive anything useful but within marriage. Well now you have boundaries. OK. And what is the purpose within marriage. It is not the entirety of the marriage. It is an aspect of a marriage like I always think of Jony Erikson Tata. You know what's her marriage like. Is it completely disastrous because of her disability. I would not say so or I would imagine her and her husband are fulfilled in other ways and have other ways of forming intimacy and knowing each other. And so yeah I think marriage positive positivity is the important aspect. So one thing from this book that I just started reading in the preface is he characterizes the difference between kind of deontological ethics and teleological ethics. And I think that's kind of the difference between sex and knowing your place in the story Old Testament New Testament Paul and First Corinthians because I think in spiritual bodies someday like St. Paul says knowledge will pass away I think sex will pass away. We're not going to be having sex for forever. And so I think there are it's knowing your place in the story. I think right now as as biological physical bodies we're meant to be having sex or meant that's part of the procreative act now. And maybe there are people who are called to live kind of eternally outside of this time in a teleological way as monastics pointing to this future thing. But that's an exceptional thing not the rule. It can't be the rule. We have to procreate. Now, interesting. You know, a couple of weeks ago on my podcast, we interviewed Martin Shaw, who's a recent convert to the Orthodox Church. And one of the things we talked about there and I talked about this in my book, Sophia in Exile, is what would happen is a phenomenological Christianity possible. I mean, can you discover it in the world as as we are right. And my position is that it is discoverable. And I think that's what's basically sociology is that that dimension of discoverability of and a lot of it has errors all written all over it and not sex. Right. The attraction is very platonic in that way. But where you know, so if that's possible and this is the thing I missed in your discussion the other day is there was a lot of theory. There's a lot of historicity, but nobody actually said anything about experience or why does it feel so good or those kinds of things or does it does it work as a kind of drawing together of persons? Yeah. Right. Nobody talks about experience. Let me get I'm just kidding. I'm absolutely I'm definitely not going to talk about my personal experience, partly because my husband is a very private person and partly because I'm a school teacher. So I don't mean stories, but I do mean, you know, you know, in our own experience, I mean, I don't want to hear your experiences as private, right? In our own experience, it does something. I remember I was thinking about this. You guys are running me there was a comedy show I saw in cable, gosh, maybe before I even had kids. So more than 30 years ago. And there was this guy and he's talking about God creating human beings. He's talking, you know, let's do the brain, Gabriel. Let's do the heart. Now let's do the let's do the sexual organs. Give me some more of them. Sensitive nerve endings. Gabriel, why is this, sir? I want to hear him commenting. Which I think was it stayed with me for a long time, but I think there's some. There's some truth to that. You're disclosed there, right? Well, I mean, not not not to be crass, but it's like you have to you have to enjoy sex for it to work as a man. I mean, sorry. You know, like it's not some party is enjoying it or it's not happening. I guess that's an important distinction as well. Some part of you is not always a fullness of enjoyment. But hopefully you should be integrated. I found interesting was he was like Christianity. Can you discover it in another way? And so certainly some of my sexual ethic was kind of formed that way, because I feel like everything I learned through the Evie Free Church about sexual ethics was kind of misguided a little bit. But what really did for me was the amount of sexual abuse in my family, especially endured through females. I mean, if you look through the Puerto Rican family trees, there's all kinds of weird stuff there. But my family was very open about talking about that stuff. So very young, I came to discover that a lot of men have treated a lot of women poorly. And so the point that even my high school girlfriend had been raped, not by me, by somebody else, but I also saw the effects that it had on her. And I kept having to ask myself, let's say I married her or somebody else. How do I know I'm not reinforcing some kind of image that was done to them? And so it made me very careful as I approach any kind of sexual relationship. Even when I got married, I was very careful as to not trying to satisfy my own appetites. Right. But how do I get to know this person in an intimate way to the point where that act, that extreme act of intimacy, I'm welcoming it, so to speak, and not satisfying my own urges. Yeah, no, I think that's exactly right, Moises, because, you know, I know in this corner, we have talked a lot about and people have talked about, you know, the sort of the evolutionary sort of substrate of, you know, we're animals, right? But we're sort of between the angels and the animals, right? We're in sort of this middle space. And we are, you know, just like we have certain sort of propensities to, you know, mine for sugar and mine for fat, right? From a sort of a biological standpoint, I think we have the same sort of propensity to mine for pleasure, pleasure as being a kind of mechanism by which, you know, copulation happens, right? And we know that the more copulation happens, more babies happen, right? So this is sort of this biology level. But we know that it's about kind of transcending mere appetite, right? So that we, and I'm struck by your conversation about, you know, the women in your family tree, right? You know, I know, you know, Brett often talks about this sort of like these two strategies, right? For sex, right? One is sort of to have as much and widespread as possible, you know, independent of a feeling. And then there's the sort of the made up and partner up and maintain with a female for the duration. You know, you have these sort of two models and unfortunately, both of them kind of work on the biological level, right? And so we are, I think, constantly in this sort of tension. You know, how do we overcome this sort of the strictly biological, the sort of the fall in biological? And, you know, to me, this this invariably brings up sort of two speedism that Paul invoked. And I know you don't like to go down that path, Paul, but I do think that that that just like Jordan Peterson has preached for now years that hierarchy is inevitable. I think that two speedism and three speedism and four speedism speedism is inevitable. And I think we just have to sort of face that head on. And therefore, you know, what is the wisdom that we can mine in the clear sort of sex negativity of of our tradition? Our I mean, all of our traditions, you know, I think we have to be. Speaking of this different speeds, I think you go through Christian history and there were there were different speeds of this. I mean, I think even pre Christian, the song of songs. I mean, why is that included in the canon of the Bible in the first place? Because it's special. It is special. And and we don't we know and all of us don't get it right now. No, but then you go go forward in history. I mean, you get to the in the Middle Ages, the time of troubadours, right? Where they use poetry and just like Solomon does in the song, they use poetry to, I wouldn't say civilize the sex, but but to to elevate it into into into into bringing something closer to the sacred. Right, right. It's to both signal and create. It sort of goes double work. I don't know, I don't know if Kale, if you talk to your students about this, I think you teach high school, right? I do. Yeah. Like, because I talked about when I teach romanticism, for instance, I'll talk to the students about when I was, you know, what a goofy kid I was. And I just thought I couldn't just have a girl. I had to earn her. I'm going to write poetry. And I was in sixth grade and I wrote a whole book of poetry for Carrie Messon Shaw. And 10 years later, I was 22. I was at a baseball game with my girlfriend. She said, Mike, I still and I bumped into Carrie. And she said, I still have the book wrote me. I was like, I put a bag right over my head. That's so good. That's so good. People don't have. And I mentioned this to students down there like, yeah, that's never going to happen. Well, well, in my in my experience, when I'm talking to my kids about like, for instance, I teach Romeo and Juliet in in the in the freshman year. And what is so remarkable to me is that so few of my students believe in love. Like love is just off the table. It's not real. It is it is, you know, the contractual spirit has descended upon the kids and they just do not see it either as an ideal or even certainly not possible and probably not even as an ideal. And that's at 14 years old, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah, the 14 does. Does the New Testament change the conversation on this from the old? Absolutely. Yes. Say more, Laura. I mean, I think it just obviously does, doesn't it? Does anyone think it doesn't? No, I kind of don't think it does. I mean, because a lot of the Old Testament is narrative. So we're reading in the Old Testament about things that happened. But I don't I don't think of anything in the New Testament going against what I read in Genesis two. Oh, yeah. No, I don't think it's like an argument against Genesis two or an argument against marriage being good or anything, but it adds it adds elements to the conversation. And you can tell because people took some things from it and ran with them the way they did. Because I think our our Jewish like the Jewish friends in our community, like I've I mean, Yosef, we've been I've been talking to Yosef about this and Hezzi and they would say, I mean, they see Judaism as being very sex positive. And so the negative aspects of the New Testament where it went sex negative, they would not resonate with it all. And I and I wouldn't either. I think those were wrong. No, I think Laura was talking about how sex changes with the New Testament. I think it changes with Paul by that misapplication of what Paul says. Yes. I think, you know, sure. The first miracle performed in John is at a wedding. Right. And it's in the and I tell my own children, I said the Bible starts with the wedding. The miracle start with the wedding and Bible ends with the wedding. Yeah. OK. So don't ever forget it. And but I so so I think, you know, like I said before, we're just dealing with two thousand years of getting it wrong. Well, I don't I don't I'm not ready to go there, Michael. I don't think it's two thousand years of getting it wrong. I think it's two thousand years of trying to figure out the balance of costs. I think that. You know, I ask myself the question when listening to Laura and Sam talk with Paul the other day, I kept asking myself the question, you know, what is obvious to me and I'm putting obvious and scare quotes, what is obvious to me, you know, Kail Zeldin in twenty twenty three, you know, must be a blind spot that I'm not looking at clearly. So for them, let's say them, they are our forebears in the ancient church, right? There's there there, you know, I think from my vantage point, sex negative, basically, you know, that for them, it was obvious. It's like, it's like, of course, you know, of course, you know, this is like this super mega powerful thing that is going, you know, can uncork all kinds of chaos and damage like it's it's absurd not to think it is. So therefore, what am I missing there? Like, there's got to be some wisdom there. I'm not saying we have to be created exactly, but there's got to be some wisdom there that I think Moises, you may have hit on a little bit, but go ahead, Laura. Well, that's yeah, that's kind of how I feel, too. It's definitely not that I would want to recreate the past. And I and I understand that some of it was stupid and that also it created a lot of human misery. So, but I but but I think I think people were working something out over all those years that we can learn and we can distill some wisdom from some of it. And so that's why I wanted to go back to like, I think something that maybe you or Michael were talking about was, is there a danger in trying to let's get so close to the early church, like take the cannon out of it. Let's get so close to the early church that we know what they thought about everything. And then that's the most faithful representative representation of Christianity. Is that true? Do we believe that? I'm Catholic, so I'm okay with being in time and allowing things to develop and roll out over time. So, no, I don't feel like I have to pretend to live in like then. The councils, right? I mean, you have to face the councils, the councils rise because they're trying to work something out that wasn't clear. You know, so so, you know, I don't want to go back to like maybe maybe say I'm gonna get mad at us here, but I don't want to go back, you know, pre-Nicaea to sort of rehash problems that I feel like Nicaea has sort of risen up to address, right? It's like. I completely agree, which is why I think that going back to origin or some of these guys and being like, well, this is what all the early church fathers were writing is a problem because they're writing in a context and they did not like they cannot apply what they're seeing to all times and all spaces and everything else. And it's a problem to do. And even if we're going to go back to like Augustine or someone like that, like Augustine wrote literally that like if you do what he called like unnatural acts with your wife, right, we'll just leave that, you know, to the imagination. But he said it would be better for a man to be unfaithful to his wife and have a natural sexual relation than do an unnatural thing with his wife. So he was saying commit adultery if you're going to do this other kind of sexual act. And like, so like one, because we read Augustine, we can't just say, oh, well, this is what the early church fathers like, I think we'd be really uncomfortable with a lot of the things that he's Right. Right. Because remember, marriage is a covenant. Right. And so so, you know, that's why I think it's important you all we've invoked marriage or Michael, I think you talked about marriage centric as opposed to just necessarily sex centric. You know, marriage is a covenant in part of at least the Catholic theology that I sort of grew up with in both, you know, is the sense that part of my job is to help my wife achieve blessedness. Part of my wife's job is to to help me, you know, become holy. And and and so therefore, you know, your wife is not, you know, in that Augustine model you just brought up, Tripp, like your wife is sacred to you. So the fact that you would defame or profane is probably a better word that you would profane that which has been gifted to you and is a sacred person is really important. And therefore, you know, the idea that, you know, again, this is another problem I have with sort of the rampant sex positivity of our time is that it's as if, you know, young guys are told and I think Sam brought this up in his conversation that, you know, once you get married, you can have all the wild sex you want. It's like, wait a second. There's another person involved here and it's called your wife. And, you know, maybe she's not down for this today or now or ever. And like, maybe there should be some nagoos. Why is it always the dude who wants the stuff? I mean, what if the wife? No, no, that's fine. Let's be fair. And Paul's right there. But in my experience, many of the women that are like that, they want those things have been sexually abused. And that was the scariest part for me as when when I would have women come on to me, which isn't a regular thing. Oh, come on. I don't know, though, but when we go across the street from the library to that bar, there's always that lady. Yeah. And it makes me wonder. But there's an aspect of it now where, like, if you go back 50 years and you tell a young man 50 years ago, once you get married, you can do whatever you want. What he wants is going to be very different from a young man today. And so, I mean, because you introduced the idea. Yeah, I'm not arguing for the unnatural acts, whatever we want to categorize. I'm not saying that that's a good thing. What I'm saying is Augustin said it would be better for you to have go to the prostitute with that stuff instead of your wife. Well, I get it. And I think no one here would say, yeah, fine, if you really need go to the prostitute, that's better. We would all be like, no, don't like like that's not don't break the commandment. OK. Yes, exactly. And so like Augustin. So there's a rhetoric to that stuff out. Right. So Tripp, there's a rhetoric to that. Right. It's like, I don't even want to he's not saying to go to the prostitute. He's saying it would be better. Like neither of these are on the table. You're Augustin. Sure. He's not saying either of them are OK. He's saying one is better than the other. And I don't think any of us would say it's better. We would say he's he's highlighting the the evil of what you would you could do even within a marriage and via sex. And so like, yeah. But don't you think some of this even Michael wanted to get in here is he's going to go? My my second youngest son's middle name is Augustin. But hey, that's your fault, Michael. I'm sorry. But some of my best friends identify as a professor of rhetoric. Right. But I mean, this is a guy who who kicked his common law wife to the curb so he can get holy. Right. I mean, I mentioned if I were his spiritual advisor, I say you better you better not do that. You can't do that. But he did it anyway. Right. And I think, you know, I don't even think about what happened to that poor woman. Every time I read confessions, I think it doesn't matter. He did it for holiness. Or his son. Because he had a son. I thought I can't remember where I read this. Yeah, I did, too, Tripp. I heard this. I read this. I think that I read that he did still support her financially. And he like but I that's all I know. I mean, I just read that and I can't remember where I read it. So the more so I'm going to have to go in a second. But the more we're talking about this, I really do think a lot of this is about deontological ethics and teleological ethics. Most of our conversation is centered around deontological ethics and morality rather than becoming holy. Yeah. Now, this conversation so far, I think we can all agree the Bible is and Christianity is marriage positive. OK, you know, and procreation positive. But the two things that we haven't talked about is Jesus and Paul, both single guys to the best of our knowledge. Little unusual in the Jewish context. Jesus is married to the church. Oh, well, yes, which is why which is why Michael had to bring up the one thing that I strongly disagree with them on, which is Mary's special virginity. I think it's metaphysically necessary to completely break hierarchy. And the and the notion that Mary is the archetype of the church is completely destroyed, if that's not the case. But don't make the anarchists defend hierarchy, man. I know. Can she can she have integrity and not be a physical virgin? Yeah, right. But the thing is, that's a horrible example to have to Christian families. Right. Actually, the old thing was saying something earlier that I thought was really getting to the point, because the other thing that I would like to interject into this is like to acknowledge the fact that romantic love is an invention of Christian culture. And when Trip was talking about how sexuality was viewed in the ancient world and how it was all about power and property, really power and property is what it was about in the ancient world. Romantic love. It's like only a Christian culture gives us Dante and the troubadours. Like, yep. And so that's it. Yeah. So that's the other thing that I would like to see us talk about. I would love to talk about that. There wasn't time to cover it in the conversation. Yeah, I know. I know. I get that you guys can't like cover all of no, of course, not two thousand years. Be better, Laura. No, but I've got 15 or 20 more minutes. I can be on here if anyone wants to talk about that. Yeah, go for it. I mean, I wrote down a bunch of quotes from like, so you guys quoted John Christostom, but he was like describing the sexual ethics in the fourth and early fifth centuries, talking about how Roman laws allow dealers to enslave children and to train them in sexual specialties for sale as prostitutes. Like this was this is what the early church was reacting to. And we have to be very aware of that. Whenever we're reading, they're like, hey, rain this shit in. Right. Like that's that's a really important context that like they're not dealing with us. Look at our context right now. Do we have to do we have to take away? We have a different but we have a different problem, right? Because now we've got porn everywhere. People aren't getting married. We're having sex, but not having children. And those kind of things are fertility rate is plummeting. So what do we really think that John Christostom or Irenaeus or whatever, would they really be worried about people having sex and having pleasure within the context of a monogamous marriage? Or would their attention be focused somewhere else? And I think the answer is obvious. I might disagree with that a little bit because I mean, top three reasons marriages fall apart in laws, money and sex and and marriage is falling apart because of sex right now, because of lack of pleasure or misunderstanding of that is a significant and huge problem in our current context. So if I was a founding father, which I'm not, I might write something about that. Why are husbands seeking pleasure and only seeking sexual pleasure? Maybe, but people are also putting off sex for much longer and putting off like young people are having sex way less than they ever have by like in terms of when we're polling, people are getting married way later. That also means that we're pulling too, because like in poor communities, that's not I'm talking about like in America and yeah, I live in America too. It's not the case. And that's the tricky part is a lot of it, we're dealing with studies or things that apply themselves towards a certain socioeconomic status. The ones really suffering the consequences are those even in America at the rural and poor urban. Yeah, right. But to this point, you know, the if you recall in one of the sections of Louise Perry's book, she talks about, you know, that that post sexual revolution, you know, women don't have any leg to stand on to say no. Right. And I thought that was a really powerful part of the conversation. Anyway, I lost my train of thought, sorry. Well, you know, Gregory of Tours inspiring story was that a man and a woman get married because their parents set them up, but the woman didn't really want to get married. She wanted to save her body for Christ. And she tells her husband that and his response is, OK, we'll do that. We just quite amazing, quite amazing. I mean, yeah, no, there's another book by Peter Brown where he says, and I just like wrote it down, men own the bodies of their in this in this Roman world. Men own the bodies of their male and female servants within the walls of a great rambling house filled with young servants over whom the master rules supreme fidelity to one's wife remained a personal option. Despite harsh laws punishing women, married women for adultery, infidelity by their husbands incurred no legal punishment and very little moral misappropriation like that. That's the world that the early church was dealing with. But that's I have to I have to say, you know, with the example Laura just gave in the. In the Gregory of Tours, the Saints, there are so many examples of that that same story where a couple gets married and, you know, the woman or the husband, usually the woman, wants to be dedicated to Christ. And so they vow to live in celibacy or die. And. Well, that's the story, right? But it's also it's also rhetoric. It's also propaganda, right? It's it's sending it's selling a message. This one when the right whoever the writers were or whether they were the fathers or later medieval writers, they had there was an agenda, right? And this was this was the this was not coming from, like I said before, from the or from as Paul said, from the bed up from the ground up. It's not coming from the lady. This is coming from from from the hierarchy. But again, this very model that they were put in. This is now I don't know about you. I'm I think a little bit older than most of you. But when I was a kid going to Catholic school, you know, the the take home, even though it was not explicit, but the implicit take home was that, you know, the highest calling is the priesthood. Michael, did you graduate high school? What year did you graduate? Do you mind asking what year did you what year did you graduate high school? Nineteen eighty. OK, so the takeover, you know, the message was, you know, the priesthood or religious life is the highest calling. But if you can't do that, marriage is OK, too. And that that was that that was not. And that was certainly the world my mom grew up in. You were trying to work. I grew up in. But if you were trying to subvert. You know, especially within Christian communities, if you're trying to subvert or even convert women to Christianity and they were being abused in the ways that they would have been abused by the early Christian church, this would be a way of saying, hey, Christians don't behave this way. They don't consider your bodies this way. There's a higher calling that you can can have. And these stories would stick out even if they're true, like whether or not they're made up or they're propaganda or whatever. Like even if they're true, they would stick out and those stories would be told. So it. Well, I don't I guess propaganda is a very negatively valence word. I mean, is Marvel is is is endgame true? So here's a question. Propaganda should should Christians aspire. To sexual pleasure and bliss in the context of marriage, because you know, we're talking about aspirations here and we're talking about propaganda and we're talking about hierarchies. And, you know, one of the things, one of the tensions in Christianity very much is, is the single life better? Is the married life better? And of course, Paul says, well, you know, if you got this weakness then marriage. So is is is and and Michael wanted to bring it back into the phenomenological. Is it are we are we to aspire to sexual pleasure? Yeah, OK. So let's tie that with the earlier question that I don't think we ever answered, Paul, was is the Bible sex positive? I think that we just kind of like rambled around it, but maybe let's go around and everyone give their answer alongside that one. Is the Bible sex positive and is sexual pleasure slash bliss something a Christian should aspire to? Like, let's just go around and let's all like give our takes on that, because I don't think we ever answered that question that you asked. A rare moment of silence in this group. When I first when I first dropped into the conversation, I would go back to what I was talking about, which is like this Christian development of romantic love, because to just keep it at the level of sex isn't to your you're not you're not making it Christian yet. So it has to be so it has to go a level up from that. It's like just talking about it in terms of sex is not enough. But so romantic love is which is a Christian development is actually the ideal. And but not everybody. Here's the thing, though, is romantic love better if it's sexless? Chivalry? No, but you know, it's actually about the people. It's like about the night. It's about the night balancing the masculine and feminine within himself. It's about it's about alchemical marriage. It's not really. But but but here's the thing. Here's my concern. And Laura and I will just I just want to say this really quickly. My concern is like we don't want to we also there are people who are not going to have that available to them. So we don't want to get to the point where we we start talking really negatively about celibacy either because celibacy still remains a legitimate option within a Christian context. But I would want what I want to get away from is but but it's only we're talking about arguing about which is higher. There are two different paths that are equally valid and are right for different people. I would now I would like to get my hands up. You got to get I was going to say something before, but now I want to respond to what Nate just said, which is that I feel like the answer to that problem is to take yourself lightly, right? Like most Catholics know that GK Chesterton quote that angels can fly because they take themselves lightly. Right. And there are different callings in life and there are different things you may be called upon to do for various reasons. And you need to take yourself and your desires rather lightly in order to. In order for that to be fruitful. Right. So there's a way of doing a set of system where you're all storm and drawing about it and you're taking yourself so seriously and whether or not you fulfill your desires is just like such a tragedy or whatever. Yeah. And then there's a way where you're you're able to do it with more of a perspective on what a little thing you are and how great God is and how a relation what a relationship with God means and that it kind of and that if you have one all the other stuff, it it matters in a sense, but there's a sense in which it doesn't really matter what you're being asked to do. You know, does that make sense? No. Yeah, it does. And I also like I think the other thing, the other thing I would want to add to to to what I was saying earlier is that even the same person in a different season of life might have a different calling. There's something weird about our culture like like hypersexualizing everybody through every stage of life, like the idea of like trying to have sex, sexy seventy somethings is just creepy and weird. Right. There's something really disordered about that. We're talking about gender sexuality with a four year old. Right. Yeah. Completely insane thing. Yeah. So do we ever answer whether is it what we're asking with the Bible or the church is sex? Yeah. Sorry, we got away from Tripp's question. Well, I guess it's Paul question. I'm just trying to tie them together. So is the Bible sex positive like the canon? Ignore. And I'll read a line from scripture and you tell me if it's sex positive. Go for it. I am a rose in the field and the lily of the valley, like a lily among the thorns. So is my love among the daughters like the apple tree among the trees of the forest. So is my well-beloved among the sons of men under his shadow had I delight and sat down and his fruit was sweet up to my mouth. Positive or negative? Well, that was about how much price the church was. I wanted to point that out originally when you were bringing up Song of Solomon about it being allegory. The allegory only makes sense if sex is positive. Exactly. Yeah. Then you're like, well, what is God doing here? If that's a negative thing, right? Well, if there's no like human equity, it's kind of like Hosea, like the allegory between Hosea and the prostitute wife and Israel being unfaithful to God, that only makes sense if actually an unfaithful wife is a bad thing. If an unfaithful wife is not a bad thing, then what is God even saying here? So yes, allegory, of course, it's not like literally a husband writing to his wife. But the allegory only makes sense if the Bible is sex-populous. But here's a little little aside, which is really important as far as the Reformation goes. So with both Milton, John Milton and Edmund Spencer, there's a there's a move where they do it. Stanley Fish wrote a book about this called Surprised by Sin, where they'll use this kind of language to draw you in to, oh, you know, using some kind of beautiful imagery of a woman, for instance. And then they'll come in with that, aha, see how sinful you are. You thought that was beautiful. You thought that you were excited about that one. How dare you! Right? Which is basically that was that was the the M.O. of most going back to at least the Middle Ages and even earlier than the Middle Ages and going back to origin, I think, with interpretations of the song songs. Right. They wouldn't let the lady read it because they would read it as an allegory. Right. So why? I mean, I want us to really ask the question, what were they scared of? Like, I don't want to I don't want to strawman this. I don't want to turn everybody into sort of like super prudes until 1930 and we finally legalized contraception. Like, no, I honestly like it's a very sensual I mean, if I'm going to if I would have some qualms maybe about a woman getting up and reading some of those kind of verses in a church. Well, you're already you're already behind the curve because that would have been allowed anyway. But again, why? True. But but the reason why I wouldn't know, I mean, I'm really serious qualms is actually because like hearing a woman express sexual desire verbally and describe those things as being pleasurable might actually make men think of her that way. That's her husband. And it's it's not crazy to me being like there's some things that maybe you should read, a man should read or you should read in your home. That's not proper to give to a 17 year old and put her up there on stage and have a read. Yes. I don't know why this is controversial, but it's it's not to me. I think it's very obvious. Like St. Bernard of Clairvaux, his book of commentary in the Song of Songs is like 500 pages on a five page book. And that was the most popular book read in the monasteries and in the convents during the Middle Ages. Right. Because what are you sacrificing? Right. I mean, I think again, I want to really resist the urge to make fun of all these extaji old people. Right. I mean, you know, that they they clearly saw in it. I mean, if I'm a celibate monk, you know, I think that sacrifice is real. Right. Now, that doesn't mean that we we married folk don't have our own sacrifices. We all know that there's there's there's ample sacrifice there. You know, my my my personal belief is is that the pill has been has allowed us to pretend that there are costs and that there are sacrifices, which I think is the real evil of the pill. Sorry, I'm just going to say it. But that's it. Maybe for a different time. But anyway, what am I sacrificing and why am I sacrificing for? Well, you know, you know, the high rose gamos, right? You know, you know, I we the church gets to marry God. And like, that's a that's a that's a that's quite something to forsake in the now for the ultimate in the future and in the in the future eternal. I think that's the one of the most important points, Kale, is the sacrifice in both pathways. If I'm going to be celibate, I'm sacrificing something. If I'm remember, we're called married. I'm laying down my life. You know, I'm sacrificing everything for my wife or the church. They're kind of the same thing in my right. Correct. We're taking all others. Well, we forget, right? You know, the chastity, you know, at least the way that I've I've been taught chastity in the Catholic context is that chastity is sort of, you know, within the specific calling, you know, that that that you are living through. Right. So it's always sacrifice. You know, again, it's always cost. And and and I know I hammer on, you know, yammer on about this. But I my concern about our sex positive moment is that it's a real big pretend that that we can, you know, lean in and have it all and blah, blah, blah, blah. And it's just it's just not true. It's just not true. And a Christianity. That goes back to what Nate was saying. Yeah, that goes back to what Nate was saying, though, too, is that, you know, I think in Laura, you and Sam were talking about about the the ideal as if like there's one way of behaving as if like that's the best thing. And everyone should strive toward that. And I'm not sure that I think that we should think of the ideal as a set of rules or behaviors rather than like the character of a person. And so we can say Jesus was the ideal man. But he was fulfilled. He came to fulfill a very specific purpose on this earth. And one of them was not pro creation. And so therefore marriage wasn't a part of that. But that's not to say that none of us don't have that role. And for us to not fulfill that role would be less than ideal. And and so we're actually not living up to the ideal if we're supposed to have kids and get married. And that's what God would have for us. And we refuse to do that because of some invented ideal that God didn't call us to. What are the things that makes us Christian as opposed to Buddhist or something else? Is that is is is the way we have thought in Christian history about desire. Desire is not something very interesting contracts to be extinguished. It's something to be to be trained and redirected and elevated. And whether you're leveled up, yeah, whether you are celibate or married, that is what your celibate calling or your married calling is supposed to do. Right. So either that happens through a romantic love that creates a deep connection to a single person that is elevated, or you are able to direct that longing directly toward God to the celibate life. Well, it's kind of like if the thing that you're doing is properly oriented within the hierarchy, then it's good to do. And if you elevate that all the way to the top, then you've done something wrong. But then if you only look at the top and you don't look at all the things that need to orient toward it, then you're doing it wrong. And so like sex is a good thing, properly oriented within the hierarchy that God has created for us. OK, so I'm sorry, guys, but I have to I have to go. But it sounds like Sam might be jumping in. So, oh, cool. OK, if you want to. Thanks for starting this conversation. Oh, and Nate, we should totally do a conversation about courtly love. Yeah, it's Sam. Yeah, let's do it. All right. Bye bye. So so OK, so in terms of the title of the of the talk here, why is the church today so sex positive when the ancient church is so sex? Has the properly understood, has this been a correction in the history of the church? Or has there been correction in the history of the church? I don't know. No, I don't know. There's certainly been an alteration. I don't know if I would call that a corrective, but you know that this is the you know, I was thinking about this question, Paul, you know, today, this morning on my run and, you know, I've been thinking a lot about carburetors lately and if you follow my Twitter feed, you may have seen me talking about carburetors and like they're amazing, right? That this is crazy technology that that allows us to have engines that move our cars, etc. Right. And I know we do fuel injectors now, but you get the basic idea that it's like a little bit of air and a little bit of gas and it has to be properly calibrated. And if you're in a high altitude, you have to calibrate it one way. And if it's a low altitude, you have to calibrate it another way. If you have too much gas shooting through there, you're going to black out your your spark plugs, etc. Right. So it's it's this real delicate tension balance thing. And I want to argue that that this question about sex positivity and sex negativity, you know, is falls into that category of I don't think that there is a right answer in the way that like it's this we can sort of create a recipe and if you do that, the data that the data sort of this like spreadsheet, you know, sort of thinking that that that because we're human beings, you know, it's in a constant tension. Right. And and the reason and then therefore when you think about sex, I feel like conversations are difficult because we're trying to talk about sex in a vacuum and and certainly in the Christian context, we have to understand sex is happening in this dynamic tension between husband and wife. Right. And every Tuesday is different, every Thursday is different. Right. It's never the same. And and so much of this tension. You know, what was John talking about at the at the conference, you know, this sort of to find the right grip. Remember, he was talking about this, you know, that you're in this sort of ready position and you're constantly, you know, finding that sweet spot that changes every day. And so I think like some some sometimes, you know, if we want to talk about time in the church, sometimes it might call for a kind of sex negativity. And I think it's sometimes, you know, maybe we overcorrected that way and we could probably be a little bit. But I think at the heart of it is a sort of a deep a need for a deep respect for the power of sex. Yeah. Right. Because it's, you know, it it it it can possess you, you know, it it can it can make you do crazy things. Right. And and therefore, as what Sam and Laura made me really take seriously is because I came out of this sort of very postconciliar sex positive theology of the body thing, which I still basically appreciate and believe in. But it made me rethink why the church at different times would be so you might even say respectful about the power of sex. And I wonder if we're losing that part of it. Well, you know, I'm glad you mentioned that, Kale, because I came over, I read this and it's been a long time. But the idea of some things are unclean where women women who are on their period are unclean. Nick Babath and you know, and that with all not right, that semen cannot be spilled on the ground because those are the things that create life and those other things that belong to God, which is why it's not that you're unclean as in those are dirty. You're unclean because you touch something that's really holy. Right. It's different, different interpretation. And but I think down through history, it's it's become, you know, kind of the Freudian soiled or sorted variety of that, where we think of is dirty and right. Right, Michael. Whereas, you know, you look at something like the wife of Bath and Chaucer, you know, it's like they're making all the same jokes that we make post Freud. But they look at those jokes as sort of sort of in my reading of it, sort of wonderfully sort of life affirming and like, yeah, isn't it kind of funny that we like do this weird thing and we kind of like it and babies happen like, wow, this is crazy and funny. And it is actually really rather absurd. I mean, but and I and I think that your point, you know, about how things change over time, I think and I think that this is it applies with this even to the image of the church, what we you know, we think of the church or whatever that happens to be, is that these things can either become idols or icons. Right. And sex is no different than the church or the Eucharist. And it can become an idol and it can become become an icon. And if it's an idol, it reflects back your own desires. If it's an icon, it leads you to the transcendent. And that's the way I would say that we that's we have that job before us as Christians right now is is in a way because we see how sordid and how horrible I mean, with things like only fans and all these horrible things that are out there right now. We have this is in a way we're being told this is what you need to redeem. Right. Well, we're the coupling of sex, the love that happened in Christian culture is being undone before our eyes. Like that's we're watching it happen. So well, and there's biological factors in there, too, that I think cannot be separated. I mean, for example, when we went through the a lot of evangelical churches have gone through the sex positivity thing. And so men, you know, you can have all this and whatever. And we know that biologically speaking, men reached their sexual peak in terms of their desire at 25. Women tend to reach that 35. So you have all these guys, 25 year olds. Yeah, yeah. But all of a sudden, their drive starts decreasing and they're at 35. And they're like, well, I don't even want to have sex anymore. But now my wife, who's like, wait a minute, why doesn't my husband isn't he attracted to me because my drive is higher and he's just not there. But then what does he feel he has to do in order to get his drive? And that's where, you know, pornography, other things, or you have to do these other things to get me to that level. Right. And so removing sex from the context, I think, is part of the it's only positive within that context. And I feel like the Bible is fairly clear here. It's sex positive like it's honey positive. You know, it can be beautiful. It can be really dysfunctional. And the Bible talks a lot about those dysfunctions as well. Or wine. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Let's say you joined. Did you want to pass the baton to Sam and see what he has to say? You're both wearing the blue shirt. It must be the uniform. Yeah, sorry. Sorry if it's a little loud in the background. The fruits of my pro creative activity are making lots of noises at the moment. But I I really enjoyed this discussion. I finally got caught up on like two and a half X. But I still really think that my my point and my question still kind of stands that I really do think that the early church was pretty sex negative. I do think also regarding Song of Solomon, I think we underestimate also how the early church viewed Judaism with a level of suspicion and negativity that we find uncomfortable now, too. That's its whole other topic and that they were really pretty anti law. And so they could interpret Song of Songs allegorically while also saying that the kind of literal layer of Song of Solomon was perhaps not to be admired or followed and that origin was not unique in doing that either. It wasn't just invented by one guy. It was pretty consistent with the whole early church's hermeneutic of the Old Testament. I mean, maybe, Sam, but my contention, my contention is that I don't I mean, the early church fathers are reacting in a particular context and a particular culture. And so I agree. Well, another thing that I also want to point out is I don't think that this sex ethic came from a bunch of stodgy old men who were celibates at the top of a monastery's hierarchy. I think that characterization, which Michael Martin was putting around, I think that really isn't true. I think that this was very bubble up from the bottom. And if anything, it was more female driven than male driven. And I think you can see things like the acts of Paul and Tecla and other early Christian documents that were not written by some stodgy monastic like Jerome that reflected this and that I think if anything, the male led hierarchy was playing catch up on a female grassroots driven reaction against male sexuality in the Roman Empire. So I agree with you, Tripp, that there is a reaction going on. But I think that some characterization of this is some sort of, I don't know, collusion of angry celibate old men is just completely false if they have to be completely false. No, it's still it's it's still neoplatonism as well. We didn't mention but we mentioned Augustine a little bit. But I think you can't deny that the influence of neoplatonism and the elevation of spirit over matter, there was a big part of this. I agree with that. But the act of Paul of Tecla was written 200 years before neoplatonism existed. So I like a lot of my focus was on the very early church, not even really the patristic period, but the anti-Nicene period. And I could defend my restorationism that Cael was asking about some other time. But I think that the idea that the early church and really, I mean, like the first couple of hundred years when there were persecuted minority in the Roman Empire was anti-sex and sex negative and valorizing of virginity to a degree that I still find kind of shocking. OK, let's have Michael give his rebuttal. That I still think is my point, but I appreciate that. I think you're historically correct, Sam, but I still agree with Michael. Because I don't think I think I think the problem is, is like, let's not give because it is early in the church, in the history of the church, let's not give it more weight than it than it necessarily deserves to get. Because that's just not that's not the right way to understand tradition. Like it just isn't like tradition cannot always be backward looking. And we can't just assume that because it was the early church, they necessarily had it right. Well, they have to just acknowledge the fact that, hey, maybe they were wrong. And I think we're wrong. We have we're wrong in our own time for a whole bunch of reasons that probably won't be understood until well after us to that will be completely blind to. But we have but we just have to we have to just deal with the fact that maybe we just have to say that, yeah, that's was the that's what the view was. I think it's unambiguously clear that that was the view, but it's incorrect. It wasn't necessarily wrong, but even if it's not necessarily wrong, sometimes it's incomplete. Right. You're answering a different question than the one that we're asking. And we're just not aware that we're asking different questions. So, for instance, when the Pharisees go to Jesus and they ask him about divorce, he's like no divorce except in the case of pornea, right, a sexual immorality of some kind. And he gives no caveats to that. That's the only reason. Paul later. Paul, what? Trip, Paul, what I mean? Yeah, adds to it. He adds another caveat, right? He says, well, the Lord says this, not I. And he says, I say not the Lord that if you're essentially making a kind of a carve out for Christian converts whose like spouses divorced and left them to be able to remarry, which was not something that Jesus was considering at the time that the Pharisees were asking him that question. And so I don't think it's contradictory and nor do I think that Paul. Right. And if Paul has the audacity to modify Christ, then we should be able to modify what the position of the early church of the patristics and early churches based on the context. And so I think Paul is answering at that point a different question than the one Jesus was answering whenever he was asked about it, because he was being asked about men just casting off their wives because they weren't happy about them. And so he's like, screw that. No. He's been unfaithful. You cannot do that. And then Paul says, well, but now we're in this new period and we need to have some allowances for some other things while still respecting the high view of marriage that Jesus gave. So if Paul can do that with Jesus and we're not going to say Jesus is wrong in the way that he gets rid of it, obviously, we have to be able to say that the early church need may need to be abrogated in some ways because they were reacting to different questions than the one that we're asking right now. That's my point. I don't know, Michael, did you want to have? No, I mean, I think, you know, you see it in Paul, I mean, who received a Greek education. There was this elevat- it goes back to Plato. You want to say, you don't use the Neo Platonist, go back to Plato. The elevation of the spirit over the body. And it's just how it is. I agree with you, Martin. I think that we underestimate how Hellenized that area of the world actually was. Like, it was very, very, I mean, you go to, I went to Ephesus and you can actually see, like, the different buildings and which ones were built by the Greeks and which ones were built by the Romans, just by Archway. Like, it's very, very Hellenized area of the world. And I think it's hard for us to understand that these weren't like this kind of enclave of Jews that never read Plato or anything like, no, they would have read it. It was like Alexander the Great did his job in spreading Greek culture throughout that part of the world. That period, that period in Jewish history seems to have been a period in which which was at in a sort of a sex negative mode compared to most of Jewish history. I was actually just there. I was just actually reading an article yesterday on the Torah dot com that was actually talking about like that period of the Second Temple period, which was which was actually much more like sex negative than later Judaism. Well, and it wasn't just Christianity. Like like like Merrill, the relations are considered a Shabbat are now considered a mitzvah. But in that period, it was it was discouraged. But, you know, I mean, it wasn't just Christianity that period that was that had that kind of I wouldn't call it sex negativity. I would call it sexual hypocrisy negativity that we see actually in the Golden Ass by Apuleus, Apuleus, which is a wonderful book. But but what happens is one of the one of the adventures he has with these temple eunuchs, these priests, and they're all perverts. Right. And he's and the story is his own initiation into the mysteries of great mother and of ISIS. And then at the end, he becomes a celibate priest in the service of ISIS. And but he but he shows the same culture. He was I think he was an exact contemporary of St. Augustine. I'm not sure. I remember my dates might be off a little bit, but it's kind of interesting to see it. And we we think that it was this Christianity that was doing this, having this resistance to this pornified culture. But it wasn't, you know, so so I guess it wasn't solely yeah, it wasn't so nice out there. Right. Yeah. And it's a beautiful book. If you ever get a chance to read it. But I have to go. Somebody just called me. They have a swarm of bees. They want me to come and catch. OK, go catch those bees. It's the life. It was great talking to you guys. Take care. Thanks, Michael. All right. Now we are into a smaller group. So we've got we've got 25 minutes left. Is there anything that you all have wanted to go into? And we've left unsaid. Have we been too theoretical? And the grim. Well, I guess I would like to get Sam's take. I would like to get Sam's take on my contention that going back to like the very earliest church and the earliest writers is what we should be aiming for in terms of finding the most like the highest fidelity version of Christianity. I'd like to I'd like to hear an argument for that, because I don't think that that's right. If we do that, I agree with you, Sam. We're going to have a lot of sex negativity in this because like it's you know, after the New Testament, like those patristic like those early church fathers were very sex negative. Why do you think that that should be our end? Yeah, sure. So, I mean, I admit that I'm probably much more restorationist, especially than a Catholic or Orthodox person, even more than a Puritan or a high church Protestant or even a CRC pastor would be. In my hermeneutic approach. But if I were to defend that idea, it would be that Jesus was a perfect revelation from God and that the early church had some proximal closeness in time to that, that we don't and that there's some, you know, right now, that there's some value in that and that they have some witness to give us now because of their closeness and time to Jesus and his apostles and stuff like that. But I would also say that really my main point, you know, I feel like I'm a little bit misunderstood as I'm like are already fully 100 percent on board of we need to adopt the early church sexual ethic. I'm more like I was surprised that this was there. No one had ever taught me about this. Well, there is some ignorance and incongruity with the way that most of the church I see talking about sex now is with regards to Christian history and that there needs to be a more mature integration of Christian history with the way that we're talking about it now. And I don't have a bunch of clear answers on how to do that. But I think my my main goal was to stimulate that idea and discussion. You do bring up something really interesting right there, Sam, and the the idea that it's very much different from the way the church now is talking about sex because most people in the church are talking about sex or talking about it because it's positive, not because they know anything about it whatsoever. And I found it's not just true of the church. This is true of like the entire first world culture. I've been in bars and churches and clubs where people when I was a sex integer. What do you think about this? And we get in the conversations. These people are participating in things they have no idea what they're doing. They're acting very confidently about it because they think they ought to. But I think there is a big issue that when it comes to sex, sexuality, gender issues and things like that, there is a large segment of the church that's speaking from huge empty spaces of ignorance. They haven't looked into it at all. They've only read books by their peers or people that they that already align with their preconceived notions, kind of Jonathan Haidt type. But there aren't a lot of people talking from like a desire to do the research and learn. So I'm going to bring in some questions from the audience now. And Grim Grizz asks, Tantra, sexual, spiritual, energy and sex as act of worship. This is something that on the video that I played or that I pointed to that sort of got this going in Preston Sprinkles where you had the Old Testament scholar was like, hey, this is this is the sex sexual ecstasy as psychotechnology brings us to the gods and Christianity's like, no, and Judaism. No. I mean, is that a big difference between pagan? And because I think there is very much in terms of some new age communities now. Yes, sexual positivity is out there. I would say it's it's anti-Christ. The whole big thing that Christ was revolutionary is that I'm not coming here to, you know, be a victor in the normal sense, but I'm coming here to lay down my life and achieve victory that way. And to a certain degree, I take that same ethic and approach it to sex. I approach the sexual encounter in that same way. I am making myself available for something for somebody that I love, laying down myself for that. And so the idea of through achieving some kind of pleasure, we reach God. I just think that's very contrary to the whole ethic. And again, you know, are you sure that's how someone who is practicing tantra would describe what they're doing? I can't assume that about everyone. Because I have spoken to several that do and. Yeah, I mean, maybe some like, you know, maybe that's like, you know, some celebrity heartthrob might describe it that way or something. But I wonder how the practitioners think of it, because like one of the one of the ways to think about to think about tantra is actually as a as a canonic act. So I'm not. All right. I'm not so sure I would just like. I'm not good. I'm not endorsing it either, but I'm not so good for who I cannot. It depends on what you're like for a married couple. Like, I don't think it's necessarily I don't think it's necessarily like the idea of of entering into that union in such a way that you're trying to like remove as much of yourself as possible to be in that moment of union. I don't think that's a bad thing. And I don't think that's definitely not anti Christ. I'll definitely say that I would say I would say the approach is though, because it's subtle and it's not because the idea of Christ is there everything the people that I love are more important to myself always. And so even in a marriage. Right. And that's what Tantra started to do. I'm you were you're attempting to give yourself entirely physically and spiritually to your partner. That's not entirely see that. It's complete. It's sport. It's not it's not it's not self-sacrificial love open toward the unitive and procreative there. I'm going to dump my Catholic stuff right on you. I just I I it's also completely absurd. Right. I mean, if you're like 25 and you don't have kids like fine, go spend all Saturday afternoon having nine hour tantric sex. But like married people live in the real world, not in like tantric sex world. Economically, there's the aspect of it. Right. Right. I mean, it's just it's absurd. Like, what about work? Like, you know, I sitting in these nine hour session. It's just I don't know. I just think it's dumb. It's selfish. Isn't the general idea that that it's the the ecstasy of the pleasure that gives you access to some sort of spiritual experience that is sort of some kind of psychotechnology? I think it's very similar to the it's very similar to the psychedelic question. Right. Christians have access to the true thing, not via psychedelics. And I think, you know, the tantric thing is some sort of similar attempt at short cutting. I mean, I just I would love to hear I would love to hear, you know, like the you know, the journal of, you know, a 75 year old former tantric practitioner. Like I really would like what would that be like? So when you're in your hot, racy 20s and 30s and you're like having tantric sex, you know, what wisdom did you derive, you know, when you're 80 years old? Like, I mean, talk about two speeds. All right. Yeah, but there's something about you're talking about. So I think what everybody's talking about here is some like California version of tantric sex completely removed from its cultural context and practiced by Westerners. All right. That's not what I'm that's not what I'm trying to say. We shouldn't be so quick to rush to judge me. Nate is speaking for the purists. I'm going to go back to the Christian realm. And that's he has a question. Is Christ devotion to the church a kind of chivalric love? Yes. Yes. One hundred percent. All right. That's why she will. That's why she will. We still matters. That's why it's an enduring cultural mean, because it is actually how we're supposed to be Christians in the world. And I don't mean like knights and armor and that kind of shit. I mean, the ideals of chivalry are self-sacrificed to protect the innocent and the vulnerable. Right. And the and the kind of like chivalric or courtly love, it's supposed to also be morally elevating to all involved. Right. So I think that that's that's the difference between lust and what we're talking about whenever we say sex positivity. Right. It's morally elevating. It's not just it's not the DND. You're deducting points. Kind of right. Right. Right. It's not that. All right. I have dropped the link in the in the comments. So we'll see if anyone wants to come in here and correct us. Grim, grim, grim wasn't real happy with most of the answers. Nate sort of stuck up for him. Here's another question. How can Christ suffer in every way like us and yet die a virgin? You can't suffer after you're a virgin after you're no longer a virgin. I was just saying, what what is a virgin suffering that that we're not? I feel like actually that's an addition. And Hebrews, Hebrews says Jesus was tempted in every way like we are. It doesn't say he suffered in every way like. That's right. I've had to suffer with Jacob for a long time and Jesus never had to suffer with Jacob. So go ahead. So I love you, Jacob. OK, Chad, you got a question or you had a comment? Yeah, no. Like the question I have is about. So there's a couple of teachers. Well, there were a couple, but I was wondering how. What are some practical explanations you might be able to give or or practical practice or something or good reason to like a secular maybe nominal Christian around around the importance of both both sex and abstinence, maybe. And I have my my thoughts on this, but I'm wondering what you guys think is like I've had experience on the extreme, the extreme of both, I think. So I'm wondering. The extreme of both what, Chad? I'm not sure. I'm not sure. What, Chad? I'm sorry. Permiss permiss duty and then making a decision about trying abstinence and really giving that a shot and how I might be able to walk with that and why I would. Am I making sense? Yeah, I think so. I've done this before when I was teaching sex ed with kids and adults. But the idea of like abstaining to a certain degree, I mean, it's kind of like fasting. Your appetites, whether it be for food or sex, all your drives, they can be they can blur your vision. And so by purposely abstaining, you allow yourself to see things more clearly. For example, I had so many friends that were female that would introduce me as their gay friend or a family member because they didn't know how to explain to other people that I was a guy not interested in having sex with them. They didn't even like it was beyond their comprehension. But by me having that position of the guy not trying to have sex with them, it allowed me to get to know them and allowed them to get to know me and allowed even more Christian influence in their lives. Which I think is a weird sort of caveat to the sort of the story of Jerome that you invoked last talk, Paul. I mean, Jerome was famous for how many female friends he had, you know, for all of his cantankerous and his misogyny. He was like a great friend of women. And I think in that sense, right, he was not trying to sleep with them. And, you know, there's a sort of a real gift of self that that frankly taking sort of the sort of the genital potential component off the table and actually affords friendship and knowledge that that is so important. And that came up earlier when we were talking about we only understand relationships now sexually, you know, like, and I think that is part of what we've lost in this sex positive boost in the last, you know, whatever, 100 years, but really intensely in the last 30 to 40 is that friendship has been the great sacrifice. We don't know how to talk about that. And that's a real that's a real devastating blow, I think. Well, I'm sorry. I was just going to say, when we keep talking about the idea of telling a better story, I really believe that this is the thread that should be weaned into. Why would I be absent? What is so important about being a friend? And I think if so, like on my side of things, the damage that I have done and and the the the self deceit and listening to, you know, the culture and just kind of running around willy nilly. Yeah, you don't understand the kind of damage until maybe it might be too late and you really have to wrestle with what it is that you've done. So that's why I think it's important to you know, it's not just it's not a virtue. I mean, it's not just virtuous. It's like, you know, like there's like you end up hurting people that you'll never even know. And you affect the world in ways that you can't even begin to imagine unless you like have starts. Hopefully we wake up to some of that stuff. So I think the idea or the threat of of friendship and why is important before even maybe and before even hold hands. Is important and not corny. And so how do you tell that story so that's a better story? OK, I got to go. Thank you. I want to be Joseph in here because I would have really liked to have gotten someone with a lot of a good Jewish voice in here. Thought about Jacob, but that that would have been difficult. So Joseph, I'm really glad you showed up. And then he's gone. Man, he's like he got a mission complete. I showed up and he was wrestling with his camera so hard. I know, I know. Right while he was driving, I hope he seemed to have stopped the car. So, oh, look at that. Michael, welcome. Did you have a question about Joseph figures this stuff out? Well, I, you know, I finally wanted to come in a little bit of the defense of the John Piper ism, you know. Yeah, didn't really bring the Puritan thunder like he was supposed to. Well, there's a lot of people in this call, so I'm trying to. I'm not trying to do what I did to say where I just talked all the time. OK, go ahead, Michael. Well, so, you know, I grew up, you know, I had the Joshua Harris book and I gave a I gave a speech to my group about dating with integrity. And, you know, I did all the right stuff. But like, you know, the thing that really I read Tim Keller's book, Counterfeit Gods, and he talked about Jacob and Rachel and how it was this it was an idolatrous fascination with it. And I'm reading this and I'm like, oh, wow, I thought that was like a romantic story. And I realized that, you know, this was my idolatry. And and, you know, the thing of God is most satisfied the most glorified in us when we're most satisfied in him. You know, that's why I said like, OK, if God wants me to be single for the rest of my life, then that is the best possible life I could have. And I basically had to say that to myself and pray it for about a year until I really was content with that. And then things changed and God said, no, you're supposed to get married. And then I found out that marriage is more of a sacrificial lifestyle in many ways than than being single is. And this, you know, not anymore time, but you know, even though my wife and I were were we waited till our wedding, you know, we both still had baggage that we had to deal with because of this stuff, you know, because a lot of what I had thought about sex was informed by pornography and she had a lot of shame from like people saying sex is dirty or whatever. So, you know, this stuff like and I think that, you know, this society that we live in actually does afford a lot more honest conversation about that stuff. And and other people are going to have a lot more baggage like they have to deal with. So so the like the the simple, the simple like explanations kind of sweeping the conversation under the rug is not is not really a solution going forward. Yeah. Anybody any comments on Michael's comment? I mean, I think that's just the inverse. Right. I think you're right, Michael, that that sex is powerful. And all of us in our respective standpoints and our respective histories can witness to the power of it. And, you know, I I think being serious about its seriousness is important. And that's why I think sometimes sex negativity and I know I'm going to upset some of my like reformed trad friends. You know, it's like sometimes like you have to respect the power of the thing. You know, really, I don't want to come across it. See, I'm even hearing like the voices of be sex positive, Kale, be sex positive because, you know, but but I don't know. I just think we don't respect it in a weird sort of way, even though we talk about all the time when we see it all the time. We don't respect it. Well, it's equally parts and dangerous. So it's both like it would be blasphemous to actually say that something that we were commanded to do, that we were created to feel good about doing, that we were created to have a desire to do is something that we should not do and we should like feel bad about. And it's it's like it's a necessary evil. That is blasphemous. That's a blasphemous position. That's not good. That that actually like defames God. That is not a good position. However, it is also one of the most dangerous things that God gave us to do. And we need to take that seriously. And that's why it's to be confined within certain boundaries, not just centered around certain things, confined to them. And so that's where the centered and bounded distinction, it's not just like, oh, the Christian, you know, like the Christian monogamous marriage with kids is the ideal is to be bounded between a man and a woman in a monogamous marriage for that reason, not just centered around it. And that's where I would disagree with like Andrew Claven or someone like that who was kind of more, you know, open to the gay marriage. I disagree. It's to be bounded there, not centered there. And it's a very dangerous thing, but it would be blasphemous for us to say that, oh, this thing that God commanded us to do, that he created us to feel good about and all this kind of things that actually does like scientifically bring men and women closer together, like you release oxytocin that like actually makes you like wants to be with that person and trust that person more. We're designed to do this. It would be blasphemous to say God created that as a necessary evil. Absolutely not. I will not stand. That's where my Puritan Thunder will come in. No, I that that is a blasphemous position. All right. We've heard the Puritan Thunder. I want to give you a step. There you got his camera. I let Jacob in the room. The Hebrew thunder is here. Love it. Hopefully, you can hear me now. So, yeah, I mean, I don't I I have so many thoughts. I'm not even sure like exactly where to begin or like what to address first and all this because I mean, obviously, it's it's a massively different story for us, even though we have the same. A big chunk of the same vibe in theory. And I might so I guess one of the first things I wanted to do is come in. He talked about the article he read yesterday and that's me as well. And I think that we have to really complicate the story a lot more because in the Second Temple period, yes, there was more sex negativity, but it was within specific sex within Judaism, right? So specific groups. It's going to be very confusing. We call it sex and sex groups and denominations of Jews. Some of them, I would say under kind of internal influences, we see that kind of potentially with the Therapeute and Egypt, who are seemingly a monastic single gender cult. We see this maybe in some of the descriptions of the Asteen's, but of course, in Qumran, it turned out that they have they're buried in family groups. So it doesn't really match the description we had in Josephus. But there may have also just probably is right about there must have been some groups that were similar to these guys who were maybe celibate or something. And then even within the Pharisees, like there is active conversation around this area. It's not that there's like one tradition to like Jews agreeing with each other. But like you have some pretty major rabbis into the second century who are held up and not as ideals, but like they're people who basically, you know, they would go off and study for years in the yeshiva and then come back intermittently to be married, but they'd come back intermittently to have relations. And there's like this whole question of like, is that allowed? If it is, is it OK if it's, you know, if your wife gives you permission to do that? But they're always married and they're never fully celibate marriages. There's always something acknowledged that would be problematic because mostly the command to procreate. But also more important than the command to procreate is something that I don't see in this conversation, which is so we derive for marriage basically that husbands of three things that they owe their wives and that are part of the marriage contract. And this is derived from an exodus when you can the rules are out taking the a maid servant as a wife. And it says if you don't want her, you still owe her these three things, which implies that you would have owed them to her if you married her. And one of those things is in sex. And it's not and it's not about kids or procreation. It's just like this is a right that the wife has. And that's how the rabbis read it. And then there's this entire discussion about like, OK, different people either men have this obligation to their wives, their wives have this right. And then like, how often does that seem so? And there's a whole question and it depends on your job. It's kind of the mainframe. So if you have jobs that you're away a long time, what they are saying. Oh, oh. I wanted more. Why is just getting to the good part? Well, the only reason I jumped in was Joseph looked like he was dropping out. I guess I'm here in Rabbi Joseph's obviously there's a lot to say. And I think actually the answer to your question, why is the church today so sex positive when the ancient church was so sex negative? Like I commented before on the other video, I think it's obvious because now the church actually pays attention to the Hebrew Bible, whereas for thousands of years, they thought it was worthless. And really, really? That's a big statement. Really? Yes. And the code of Jewish law is kind of like a catechism for Judaism. It has four sections. One of the sections is about marriage. And this is the first paragraph of that section from about marriage. Every man is required to marry a woman in order to be fruitful and multiply. Anyone who is not occupied with being fruitful and multiplying is like a murderer and reduces the visage of God and causes the Holy Spirit to flee from Israel. Anyone who does not have a wife is steeped in being without blessings and without the Torah, etc., and is not considered a human being. And when he marries, his sins are released, as Liz said, Proverbs 1822, he who finds a wife finds goodness and releases the will of the Lord. There is a very real sense in Orthodox Judaism. And for somebody who has not been married, this was a very difficult thing for me, but I don't change Judaism because it's not a comfortable thing for me, is that a human being, Genesis 1.27, a human being reflects the image of God in being male and female. And I think that's something Christians cannot say because Jesus is supposed to be the perfect human being. And he obviously wasn't female. And that's why I mean, I have had Catholics and Eastern Orthodox tell me, well, Jesus was married to Mary. And that people have said this and no, I'm not disagreeing that people have said that to you. I'm just saying that that's just showing that I I agree with you, but it's it's the type of gymnastics you end up doing when you have to. Well, it sounds weird, but it's symbolically necessary, Cale. I would agree with those Christians. It's symbolically necessary. That's precisely why she has to be perpetually virgin, which I would with my disagreement with Michael. Like, yeah, that's yeah. And look, Anselman is saying God is not male and female. I mean, this is supposedly a sola scriptura Protestant. Like, what do you do with Genesis 1.27? If you don't have what do you do with that when Jesus is supposed to be the embodiment of God and he fails easily in that. But it's not the embodiment of God. I mean, I do not want to get into Trinitarian stuff. This is going to be an absolute disaster. This is bad Trinitarian theology. I was just told last weekend that that the Cistercians forbade anybody preaching on the Trinity for like 100 years because it's a no. We're talking about the Trinity until we figure out what the hell is going on. Yes. And Joseph has his connection back. So, Joseph, Jacob has just been speaking for you. You see, it was very effective. I don't know if you want to add anything to that. Joseph was in the middle of explaining to us why it's good to be married to a Jew. So please continue. I don't know. I don't know where it got cut off, but like, I'm sure Jacob did it fine. You cut off whenever you were saying that if the guy was returning to his wife. The three requirements. Oh, the three requirements. Yeah. OK. Yeah. So it's just it's fundamentally different. I don't know. I mean, I'm sure Jacob said it's just a fundamentally different framing. We don't we we do see it as very sex positive, but not in the same way you guys are using sex positive. To me, like, for instance, I can talk about being sex positive, but at the same time as an Orthodox Jew who dated and married, like I did not physically touch my wife when she was my girlfriend or fiance. We never held hands. We never kissed, like no touching at all. Not even not intimate touch, not until we were married. Like, and that's normal. Not only did I not touch her, but we weren't even in a room by ourselves together. OK, like so goodbye. It's a completely different you know, all those articles and Mike Penn study wouldn't have like dinner with a woman. So that's actually OK, because we will in public. It's OK, as long as there's people around to make sure you're not doing anything problematic. But for us, like, yeah, doing that. Like so we were kind of laughing because like that's that that's a rabbinic thing. But it comes, I mean, certainly around the time of Jesus. And it's actually it was said that it was instituted or initially by King David after the rape of Tamar. So there's some interesting kind of I would say it's a combination, right? You have the kind of sex positivity, I'll say, ish. But in this weird way of the Bible, there's also a lot of accumulated wisdom. And I would say the rabbinic corpus around this. And that's that should be as much part of this conversation as neo planetism, Nazism and Roman, you know, going overboard. Because there were other options. Wasn't that those were the only options was either your Roman and sex crazy or like you were going to be kind of this, I don't know, aesthetic sort of Gnostic that like or at least Neoplatonic away from the body is all that there were other paths available. And especially for people who were living in Judea, they would have known some of those paths. I mean, there probably were other paths outside of this region. But even as in this region, we for sure know there are other paths that they could have taken. Yeah. And I think Sam's point was really good that the early church is as much a reaction against Roman sex positivity or not. Roman sex, whatever it is. It's sex casualness. Like there's a casualness toward sex that has been there. But also as an exercise of power, tyranny almost. Yeah. You know, and Joseph, like I'm hearing you talk, I remember reading of all things like a Naomi Wolf. This is like in the 90s. Naomi Wolf wrote something about her Orthodox Jewish best friend. And she had sort of spent some time as a sort of a non-practicing Jew and then had kind of reverted back to sort of her upbringing. And she she talks about the way in which she went then through the process that you're talking about in terms of that dating and that kind of real. I would just call that like a hyper respectful, respectable, respective of the power of sexuality between the sexes. And she talks about how incredible she is as a secular person, looked at her friend who would only everything was reserved for she and her husband in this hyper private way, even physical touching hair, like all of those kinds of things. And to me, it's a vision of deep, deep respect for the thing, not not negative or positive, right? Something like that. Maybe that's a way to sort of save the frame here that it's that what I what I see projected in the scriptures, both the Hebrew scriptures and the Christian scriptures, is a sense that this is something that has to be really garden. And you know, and I'm kind of deliberately using that enclosed metaphor on purpose, that it's like it's not casual. It's not nothing. It's it's it's a lot. It's a lot. And it's in its pot. And so like I was just reading Malachi two and he talks about. Man and wife, did he not make them one with a portion of the spirit in their union? And what was God? What was the one God seeking godly offspring? So it's not just a negative, like there's a portion of the spirit in the union of a man and wife. This is a positive thing for the purposes of procreation. This is something God created. And yeah, I mean, to the extent that I don't think there's any way of reading the Old Testament for sure in a sex negative way. And I think that I think the early Christians were reacting against the Greco-Roman kind of tyrannical sexual ethic of time. And that's why we read them. Yeah, I also I wanted to stress what Sam said when he first came on, which was they're reacting to the Greco-Roman thing. They're also reacting to Jews. They're also part part of that part of the. Can you say more about that? Can you say more about that? For sure, because I think part of the. Especially the anti-farist is them that comes out in the early second century and even maybe the late first century. But the Pharisees really aren't the dominant party until after the temple is destroyed and maybe 15, 20 years later. So maybe at the around the time, at least for me, Luke and Acts is being written. I find Luke, Acts is really interesting because of all the Gospels is the most pro-Farist, which is kind of interesting. But the Pharisees by then are coming out as like the dominant force, but not just the Pharisees. It's a group. It's only one group within them. Like we say, the proto-rabbites or the rabbis at that point. But by then, Christianity, Judaism are not I mean, they are seeing each other as much more heretical. Right. And they're pushing each other away. And in part of pushing each other away, they're kind of almost being allergic to each other. So part of it is like we want to go even to use another comparison like Islam. I'm going to be the most. We're going to be the most. We're going to be the most. So if you're talking about Jews on Yom Kippur, doven five times a day and the rest of the year we dove in three times a day. Well, we're going to dive in five times with the pray, sorry, pray five times a day because that's the most. So this is the opponent processing thing that Paul was bringing up in the former conversation between the Catholics and the Protestants, sort of the Eastern Orthodox sort of doing their own thing over here, not being opponent processed. But is that is that what I'm hearing you say? Yeah, I think so. I think well, no, I think that by Joseph, I think you're right. And Jacob, I think he may maybe made the point in a little bit of an extreme manner. But there's something here never like I don't think it's incidental that the two things that I would say the early church got most wrong is how extremely sex negative it was and how supersessionist it was. I think those things are not disconnected. Well, yeah, I mean, I would agree with you. I think you probably are going on to very dangerous territory. I mean, this is what my my comments in the chat were like. If the early church fathers or. Could get this wrong or that Paul could abrogate Jesus or using any of that sort of language, you know, then what else is wrong or could be abrogated or did they get wrong or was contextual or was part of this opponent processing that was still coming out and still needs to be worked out? Like, how far do you go? But with the oral tradition and the like, I mean, we can go without in the Jewish tradition. Oh, sure. So I feel like we can ask that question, but like that's that's just the we're a tradition, right? Like Judaism has its own kind of branch and then Christianity forks off of it. And we all have our own traditions. So, yeah, we can ask that question. But, you know, we're all answering the questions that were asked in the context in which we're asked them. And we have to apply those appropriately. And so, you know, I I'm not going to go to you and be like, you know, justify the Canaanite genocide or whatever. Like these were all contextual and we have to understand those stories and those questions in the context in which they're written. And I have no problem with saying that, like, yeah, Paul was Paul was answering a different question than Jesus was answering. And that's fine. And I think also we have to understand we have to understand a living tradition, a living tradition is shaped by its by its final cause in an Aristotelian sense. Right. It's not it's not just it's not only determined, it's not only determined by what by what has gone before. Otherwise, it is dead. It's actually dead. This is I think this is this is actually what's at the core of the distinction that Paul is trying to make between traditions of men and a living and a living tradition, which is of God, because the living tradition is that that is of God is directed and pulled by that final cause, which is out in the eschatological future. So we can't ever look back at any point in the in the past and say, that's it. And it's fixed. We have to be we have to be able to amend and repair it in real time. I obviously agree on the living tradition. I could we have a living tradition, too. I don't agree that the final cause is static. It's tell us that static. I think that's I'm not there. There's a million. I didn't say that it was. But it sounds like it's a very fixed eschatology. That's like we were going to there is going to be an end point. And how you just as there is. Go ahead, Jacob. No, I don't actually. I believe in I believe in the spiral. So we can talk about that later. But no, I don't know. We're going to have to cost us. It's definitely part of the eschatology. Come on, then. We're past our two hours. So so part of the reason I actually thought it was good that this conversation was pretty much had among Christians. It is that this is really, really important and complex stuff. And there is a reason why Jewish stuff kept on coming up and everybody kept on saying, where's Joseph and where's Jacob? Because I think Christianity is, in fact, looking towards Judaism in ways that it was not before in order to help itself define itself. And there's there's a reason why so many things were going off on so many tangents and it's going so far because this is this is something fundamental enough that questions of canonicity, like we were talking about in in the in the chat, questions of symbolism and, yes, the Trinity, questions that there's of tradition and final cause and and eschatology. Right. This goes into the fundamental questions of everything that religion and life is about. And so trying to have this discussion too comprehensively is just frankly impossible. And that's I think that's part of what the sign of this this weekend is going to find out. The Senate, the Christian Forum Senate. Yeah. All right. Just Jacob, get the last word. Does anybody else want to say something? Jacob has the last word is not amazing. It was a good last word. Kel, you haven't said anything in a while. Do you have anything to say? This is great. I'm just enjoying myself. This is fine. So I want to thank both the people that were on the stream before. I know, Joey, early on, was there's too many cooks. And I thought, I kind of like having a lot of cooks on this one. The purpose of this live stream for me was to hear from a bunch of voices because the the previous video with with Sam and Laura and I clearly uncorked a whole bunch of things on Nathan. Nathan, you're coming in just as I'm saying goodbye. You didn't you couldn't stand Jacob having the last word. Well, sorry, I just wanted to hop on real quick. It seems like much of this discussion has happened among people who are already past making a decision about this. And so the cakes have been baked. Yeah. And so as a younger person who is very much facing this decision, you know, the stream has been a little frustrating, to be honest, I guess, because it's inconclusive. But, yeah, I guess a few years ago, I would have assumed the default that, yes, of course, you should pursue a family. But being in the Orthodox Church or catechesis is pretty clear that celibacy is the higher good. And so now I very much am contemplating that question. And I think a missing part from this, too, has also been having a spiritual father that is supposed to guide you through this and that you turn to and consult with. Who helps you make that decision for whether or not that you're fitted for that. You know, so it's it's not a one size fits all kind of thing. All right. All right. Well, maybe I'll have to have a youth stream. And, you know, Vivian was just, you know, she's just going crazy in the live chat about all sorts of stuff. So maybe she's but she doesn't show up. You know, that's the thing. You can you control the live chat. But if you don't turn on the camera and come on the screen, you know, you're not really part of the record. So anyway. So thank you, Nathan. Thank you for coming in and thank you for all of you who have participated. This has been wild. I've learned a ton and I've enjoyed it a lot. And this is this is a lot of why I've always wanted to do this. So I'm going to end the transmission now.