https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4QeVjsYMilM

 I've been listening to the Jordan Peterson, John Verbeke, Jonathan Peugeot, Bishop Barron conversation while shopping at Costco for Thanksgiving and we just sort of landed the plane on the psychedelic portion of the conversation which I thought was probably one of the most interesting parts of the conversation. I'll obviously want to treat this more later, probably, who knows. One of the interesting things I think a lot of people look to or imagine that, especially when Jordan talks about psychedelic, use of psychedelics as revelatory, I found it a little bit ironic that of course among the four, if you were to plot them on a spectrum, the two individuals that would be most skeptical of dogma would be Jordan and John and obviously the Roman Catholic bishop and the Orthodox icon carver would be most accepting of dogma. If you take a look at Hans Georg Müller's definition of dogma, which sounded about, which sounded fairly right to me, dogma is sort of understood in a materialist frame as knowledge, especially propositional knowledge, that we get from some other source apart from the physical world. This to me would assume that the two individuals in this conversation least, most skeptical of dogma would be the most skeptical that any kind of dogmatic revelation could come through the use of a psychedelic. Now towards the end of it, John Vervecky clearly I think addressed some of this and I think he addressed it well that perhaps what the mystical experience, even one that is drug-induced, prompts is much more of a perspectival or a participatory way of knowing and not a way of knowing about the world, especially in the context of Christianity where you have a religion which is so foundationally based on the class of experience which is physical and public. Now I know there's deep skepticism about miracles, the miracles of Christ, specifically the resurrection and the idea of the incarnation of Jesus Christ as God becoming man, but of religions so much of Christian dogma is based on physical witness, not simply on revelations. Now I'm not going to push that too far, of course you have the Hebrew prophets and the book of Revelation, that's the portion that Jordan is about to take up right now, that's gonna come into play, but again I think it's ironic that individuals who are most skeptical about dogma which is supposedly sourced from non-physical witness to be at least most open to the revelatory aspects of psychedelics, that's a rather deep irony. Fair or not fair, I know psychedelics are a huge topic of conversation and there are a lot of differences among those of you who listen to me on this. It was absolutely no surprise that the two individuals who are not under the discipline of a church or the most open to psychedelics and the two individuals in the conversation which are under the discipline of Christian churches were the least. I thought Bishop Barron's, I thought towards the end of it, they really came together. I thought all of the points, I thought the points made by Jonathan about community were excellent, I thought some of the rebuttals by John Vervecky were excellent, I thought the, I agreed with the place where Bishop Barron sort of met back with John Vervecky and I think John's last point about it being transformative in the individual but not revelatory and it was Peterson who I think used revelatory and is that because of his love of Jung who, I don't know, just on a very shallow understanding, I think that towards, I think that some of the writings of Jung that have come out much more later have been seen as revelatory and so I think this will probably open up more conversations about what we mean by revelation. So I didn't want to lose these thoughts. I had them while I was stro-rolling the cart outside of, there I am outside of Costco and I'm just in my car and I'm talking and fogging up the windows. It's a little bit cool on this Northern California evening so let me know what you think.