https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=5wRXlAwhBao

 I still swatting bugs. Anyway, okay, back to the book of Romans. So there's a study guide, that's the new thing that I put out for you this morning. And let's open the passage. So we're going to take a running start at it again from verse 15 like we talked about So I am eager to preach the gospel to you also who are in Rome. For I am not ashamed of the gospel, it is the power of God for salvation to everyone who has faith, to the Jew first and also to the Greek. For in it is the righteousness of God. For in it the righteousness of God is revealed through faith for faith as it is written. He who through faith is righteous shall live. All right, well let's ask some questions about that. What do you think those two verses mean? If you had to summarize the two verses, what do you think Paul is saying? Okay, if you have faith you won't give up, you will keep going. Paul begins it by saying, I am not ashamed of the gospel. Why would he be ashamed? It's kind of a strange thing to say. If I would say I'm not ashamed to be a preacher, well what would that be implying? Yes, from my point of view, but there's something in the context. Okay, others put shame on me, they don't look highly on the profession. Something else is going on. Paul is speaking to a context. Now in a lot of ways this context has changed, but the fact that he begins that statement in that way says something about what we're talking about. Now part of what's difficult here is that there's a lot of circularity whenever we talk about something like this because we have this thing called the gospel, and again we've talked before that's a Roman loan word. What do we mean by that word gospel? Okay, it's good news. Being saved, and we're gonna have to talk about that word too. Is it connected to something historical? Paul, let's go back over Paul's life. So Paul was from Tarsus, he was at least partly trained in Jerusalem, so he's members of both of these worlds, and before Jesus, before he heard about Jesus, if you had asked Paul about what is the problem of the world, and how is there any hope for the world? How could its problem be addressed? What kinds of things might he have said? Okay, I would say again now we're thinking about a Jew here, so a Jew very much might have said the problem of the world is sin. When you think about sin, what do you think about? Bad things. Good. And a Jew might have said breaking the law. What law? Moses law, the law of God. And the problem with the world is that the world doesn't keep the law. That's one way to talk about the problem of the world, okay? And so, well, if we go all the way back in the story from the Jewish conception. So how does the world start? Creation. And there's a good creation, and there's a man and a woman in the garden, and something happens in the garden. What happens in the garden? Disobedience. They are told not to eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. They eat from it, and on one hand, when they are told not to eat from the tree, a couple things will happen. They will become like God, knowing good and evil, and they will also die, which is very much not like God. So, and then from Adam and Eve, then the story continues to unfold, and there's a flood between chapters six and nine. Why is there a flood? Wipe out the bad boys. There's a flood. The evil is wiped out, but then almost right away, evil is inside Noah and his family, and it continues to grow. And then in the end of chapter 11, especially chapter 12 in Genesis, there's a new beginning with who? Abraham. There's a new beginning with Abraham, and God is going to, through him, make a nation, and the whole world will be blessed through him. And a bunch of things happen. They go into Egypt. There's a famine in the world, and they go into Egypt and Joseph, and they're saved, but then they become slaves in Egypt, but they multiply greatly, and God shows to Moses and brings them out of Egypt, and they're going to go to the promised land, and they're given a covenant. They're given a covenant, and well, what's supposed to happen with that covenant? What is the covenant supposed to do? Restore their relationship with God, and if they keep the covenant, what? They'll be blessed. And if they fail to keep the covenant, there's covenant curses. And how does it go for Israel? They can't keep it. They fail to keep the covenant, and the most dramatic expression of that is, well, Israel was centered in the temple, and in the temple was God's presence, and the Babylonians come and they destroy the temple, and this was just the ultimate catastrophe. The temple is wiped out, but then Babylon gets wiped out, and the Persians come, and the temple is rebuilt, and we've been talking about this at the 11 o'clock service. Everyone's expecting, okay, a faithful remnant comes back, and this time we're going to keep the covenant. So the remnant comes back, and a lot of people, we've talked about Malachi quite a bit during Advent. A lot of people think Malachi is before the reforms of Ezra. Do you remember anything about the book of Ezra? It's not a book we study a lot in the Old Testament. Anybody remember what the book of Ezra is about? Okay, they come back from exile. The company is struggling, and Ezra says, well, you know why you're struggling. Remember, covenant, if you fulfill the covenant, you'll be blessed, and if you fail the covenant, you'll be cursed. So fulfill the covenant. So Ezra reads the law. A bunch of the people are taking foreign wives. The foreign wives are sent away, and now they're really going to work hard to keep the covenant, and if they do that, they're hoping, well, they'll be richly blessed, and they're not anywhere near as blessed as they think they should be, and of course the Greeks come, and for a while there's a period of autonomy with the Hasmonean dynasty, 37 AD. They basically become a client state of Rome. That's where Paul, that's the world that Paul will enter the picture. Okay, so when, for example, in Acts 1, after the crucifixion and resurrection, the beginning of the book of Acts, the disciples have a question they want to ask Jesus, and that question shows us exactly what their heart is saying. So they're asking, well, the disciples have a question they want to ask Jesus, and that question shows us exactly what their picture of world salvation looks like. What do they ask Jesus in Acts 1 verse 6? Okay, now will you restore the kingdom to Israel? Okay, what was the hope of the people in Israel that they had for Jesus? What would that look like? Okay, restoration of an independent nation of Israel. That's the beginning. Once they're independent, what should happen? How big is Rome? Well, the Roman Empire is huge. Rome is a city. It's one city. One city is ruling the world. The Jews are basically saying, we should be that city. That should be us. Same thing is happening right now in many places in the Islamic world. I mean, Osama bin Laden, part of his motivation was there are American troops in Saudi Arabia. For many Muslims, what is Saudi Arabia? God's chosen land, Mecca, Medina, all of those holy places, this is God's land, and the Arabs are God's people. Ask Kevin Zabihi about tensions between the Persians and the Arabs. He was talking to me about that this week because he's Persian. So, okay, so Paul is living in the empire and he's zealous for the law because, well, why did Israel lose the kingdom of Israel? Did Israel lose its preeminent place among the nations that it had briefly while there was David and Solomon? Why did Israel lose its preeminent place? It broke the covenant. So, if you want to get your preeminence back, fulfill the covenant. And so, a big part of the mission of the Pharisees was get the people, get God's chosen people to live by the covenant. So, when Paul goes to Jerusalem and hears about this new sect that follows this man from Nazareth named Jesus, they say he's Messiah. Why would Paul and many others be skeptical? He's not keeping all their little laws. They have a lot of laws. They have not keeping all their little laws. They have a lot of questions about that. Read the gospel. See how much discussion they have about that. But why else? What should the Messiah do? Acts 1-6. Why? Jesus can't be the Messiah because he didn't restore the kingdom. In fact, in terms of the struggle to bring back God's kingdom to the world, Jesus was a loser. Why? Why was Jesus a loser in the eyes of many people? That's right. He didn't get away with it. Revolutionaries are executed by crucifixion. Rome knew many ways to kill people, but crucifixion was often used for political enemies. Why? It sends a message. Now, you can take somebody out and behead them, poison them, strangle them. There's many ways to kill somebody. Crucifixion, you strip them naked, expose them to the world for mockery, and put them at the crossroads for everyone to see. So Rome will declare, this is what happens to enemies of the people. This is what happens to people who stand against Rome. You'll be shamed and humiliated, and you will be shown to be a loser. And to this day even, many Muslims assert that Jesus did not die on the cross. Why? Because crosses are for losers. It's only failed revolutionaries that get crucified. In fact, successful revolutionaries become emperors. Julius Caesar, that whole business about him crossing the Rubicon, why do we pay attention to the fact that Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon? Because he knew when he crossed the Rubicon and brought his Roman troops into Italy towards Rome, it was sedition. When the founding fathers of the United States all signed the Declaration of Independence, what were they doing? Betraying the king. Failed revolutionaries get crucified. Successful revolutionaries become emperors. Paul says, I am not ashamed of the gospel. Why? Because people say, well, wait a minute, who's your leader? Jesus. Your leader is Jesus. Jesus was crucified. Oh, but he rose from the dead, says you. I mean, the story tells itself. The story tells itself. When Paul then, he's persecuting the church. Why? That's a very reasonable thing to do because the path to the deliverance of Israel, their vindication and validation by God is faithfulness to the covenant. And Paul is seeing a new heretical sect arise in the midst of God's chosen people following a man who is clearly a failed revolutionary. Now his followers say he rose from the dead. Well, what's the main argument against the resurrection? Dead men stay dead. Okay, I mean, I continue to have these conversations with Jews today and one of them, friend of mine, is very clear about it. He says, you know, the biggest problem you guys have is the ascension because it'd be awfully nice if Jesus was still running around Jerusalem, wouldn't it? Then we'd believe in the resurrection. Ah, but if Jesus was running around Jerusalem, we might believe in the resurrection, but I don't know that that's the case. That would change our hearts. Jesus says to his disciples, it's good that I go. Why? I'll send the Holy Spirit. Why are we better off with the Holy Spirit than with Jesus running around in Jerusalem? Holy Spirit's everywhere. Holy Spirit's going to move through us. Jesus is going to be multiplied many times over through his people. Okay, so Paul sees this, Paul sees a threat to the plan for the salvation of the world as understood by him, by this new sect, which is clearly growing among the Jewish people, that they're believing that this Jesus is the Messiah, even though he clearly didn't restore the kingdom to Israel, and they're growing fast, so he's going to persecute them and put them to the sword and see if he can suppress them to have this group go away. But on the road to Damascus, what happens? Jesus meets him, and in a way that clearly convinced Paul, he was not dead. And Jesus says, why are you persecuting me? And he says, who are you? I'm the Jesus that you're persecuting. Why are you kicking against the goads? What does that mean? You're battling uphill, Paul. This is a fight you're going to lose. And then Paul, for the next 14 to 17 years, has to undergo a transformation. And the Paul that we're meeting here is well through that transformation, and he's already been out. And whenever he goes into these cities, he's already been out. And he's already been out. And he's already been out. And he's already been out. And whenever he goes into these cities that are out in the diaspora, in the Roman Empire, whenever he goes to these cities, he stops at a synagogue and he preaches the gospel. Well, what is that gospel that he preaches? That Jesus is the Messiah, and that he has risen from the dead, and he is ruling over the world. That is the gospel. And when you read the book of Acts, Acts chapter 13, we talked about it a number of months ago in the service, I think in Acts chapter 13, we pretty much have Paul's stump speech, that he would go from synagogue to synagogue to synagogue, and his points were pretty simple. Jesus is the Messiah. Jesus is the Messiah. We know that because he's risen from the dead. I know that because I've spoken with him. And he is reigning over the world right now. There's the gospel. There's the good news. Okay, back to the text. What does he say? I am not ashamed of the gospel. Everyone imagines he should be ashamed because you're following a crucified Jesus. This is going to come up again and again and again in Paul's ministry. Paul keeps not only not trying to hide the cross, but forefronting the cross in his message. Because if his idea that Jesus is the Messiah is going to make any sense, he's going to have to come to terms with how can we have a Messiah who is a loser? How and what does Jesus win? Because everyone's looking for a winner. That's what you look for. Okay, so that's question number one here. Paul continues. I am not ashamed of the gospel. It is the power of God for salvation to everyone who has faith. Okay, let's pause there. So this Jesus who is Messiah, even though he's not like any other Messiah they've known. Now again, when you go through the gospels, we're going through it in our men's study. Whenever we go, we're going to be in the gospels again at the 11 o'clock service. The thing to keep remembering about the gospels is that the gospels in fact were written after, they're written after this letter. They're written after Jesus has died and rose and ascended. Obviously, that's the story. But a big part of the gospels is trying to explain what did Jesus mean by Messiah? Jesus embraces the term Son of Man. He doesn't use often, but also embraces the term Son of God. Paul will talk about us being in Christ. What's happening in these gospels is a mind shift about how God is going to save the world and what this power will look like. I am not ashamed of the gospel. It is the power of God for salvation to everyone who has faith. It is the power of God. So if the gospel, if one way to talk about the gospel is Jesus as Messiah, is Jesus as resurrected, Jesus as Jesus as resurrected, Jesus as ruling, how is all of this power? And what is Paul talking about with respect to power? Okay. So let's look at it. Part of what's difficult is that these words are connected. So we've got the will of God. We've got this word salvation. Okay. Now back to Paul. So Paul is the son of God. We've got this word salvation. Okay. Now back to Paul pre-Damascus Road. What would we imagine salvation looks like to Paul pre-Damascus Road? Okay. Is keeping the law the goal of salvation or the process to gain salvation? Okay. It's the process. Then what does, what is salvation as goal? What does that look like? Salvation as goal. What does that look like? Okay. Okay. So there's very much blessing. It's very much a relationship. Now I've been talking at the 11 o'clock service about fractals. I don't know if anybody is familiar with fractals at all. Fractals are, I've used the illustration. If you pluck a leaf from a tree and you look at all the little veins in the leaf, they kind of look like a tree. If let's say you want a Christmas tree and you, there's a huge, you have a, well, trees are great examples. You can have a tree that's a hundred feet tall and a tree that's six feet tall. And it kind of looks the same. It has the same structure. The structure is the same if it's big and with its little. Crystals are like that. If you look at crystals under a microscope, what do you discover? That they just kind of grow, but they're not that if they just kind of grow and it's the same structure that grows out. If you look at a satellite photo of a river Delta, like the Nile Delta or the Mississippi Delta, and you look at things like the structure of the capillaries in your lungs, they kind of look the same. Scientists have noted that a lot of creation is very fractal. It's kind of the same pattern big and the same pattern small. Now this word salvation is a very general word. You can be playing a game with your kids and some good turn of fortune happens and I'm saved. It's a game. You're playing a little game with your kids or your grandkids on an afternoon and you know, maybe you're playing chess and your queen was saved. It's the same word we use for okay, so when the Allies invaded Germany on D-Day, eventually we'll say Europe was saved. That word really spans. It can mean little things. It can mean huge things. Okay, so what do we mean by this word? Do we mean only big things or only little things? So in the movie Titanic, you know this love story between Jack and Rose and you know one of the most popular movies that has ever been made. Rose at some point utters this phrase about Jack, Jack who died in the icy waters of the North Atlantic giving her the space up on the floating piece of debris and he stayed down there and died of hypothermia and receded into the water. And so Rose is a little bit dramatic, but it's a romance. So what did she mean? Any ideas? Can we make a list? Okay, so what do we mean by that? Well, it's a little bit of a dramatic thing. So what do we mean by that? Well, it's a little bit of a dramatic thing. So what did she mean? Any ideas? Can we make a list of some of the ways that Jack saved Rose? Okay, the obvious is he saved her from the North Atlantic and she, you know, clung to that piece of debris and finally when a boat came, she was able to help and then they came and got her in the boat and then she went off and she lived. Okay, so what else did he save her from? Those of you who have seen the movie? The movie, I've seen the movie more times than I care to have because I have daughters. Another way that he got saved is when the story starts, she is heading to America and she is going to marry kind of a cad. And because she fell in love with Jack, she rejected the cad and didn't marry him. So Jack saved her from the cad. Jack, of course, this is a modern film, so Jack helped her realize her agency as a woman and so from that point on, she was much more self-assertive than she had been before. So Jack saved her from, Jack helped her develop more in terms of her person. So there's a third way that Jack saved her. Now every way a woman can be saved is a little much, but here's at least three ways that Jack saved her. Well, saved her from what? Saved her from death, saved her from a bad marriage, saved her from not being the kind of woman she wanted to become. These aren't small things. So hey, hats off to Jack. He saved her from at least three things. And in the course of a romance, every way a woman can be saved. Again, a little bit of hyperbole. But this word salvation, we tend to think when we say the word salvation, especially in evangelical churches, what do we usually think about? Okay, set them free. Usually when people say save, they think about hell. So that when I die, I won't face the condemning punishment of God and the consequences for my sin. That's one thing. But if you talk to Christians, Christians often don't just say, well now I don't have to fear death and hell anymore. Well, that's good. I'm really glad about that. But guess what else happens in the Christian life? What other things are we saved from? Well, you said set us free. Set us free from what? Death. Okay. What else? Sin. Okay. So well, let's talk about this word sin a little bit. Because on one hand, sin can very much be about law breaking. Sin also means missing the mark. Now that's a very broad definition. We might say that Rose in the kind of woman she was before she met Jack was overly compliant to the wishes of her elders who wished her to marry a man for money. This is very much modern romance. And she felt liberated from the expectations of her elders who wished her to marry someone for money. Now, as the story went, we meet her at the end of her life and she's had a wonderful life. And if in fact, Rose had gone back to America and married at some other schlep for love, who was an alcoholic and a poor man and died in poverty, maybe she would have looked back on the kind of crappy dude that she had fallen in love with and said, maybe I should have married him. At least I would have eaten. Okay. You don't know. Life is like that. But missing the mark is a very broad definition of sin in that, well, sin is, let's say, let's say you're an elementary school teacher and you have a young student and she is so bright. She's at the top of her class and she's just excelling in all sorts of things. And the teacher will think, boy, she's really going someplace. And then 20 years later, the teacher hears something about the girl and learns you didn't go anyplace. And the teacher says, that's a real loss. Why? Because the world would have been better if she had accomplished something, gone someplace, all this language that we have. She missed the mark. She had incredible potential and she only did this. Think about Jesus in the parable of the talents. To whom much is given, much will be required. In other words, if God has given you much and you do little with it, you miss the mark. That's a sin of omission. Often when we think about law breaking, we're thinking about sins of commission, things that we commit. Sins of omissions are things that we have omitted from our life, that God has given you talent and ability and he expects you, the parable of the talents, or that he expects you to fulfill your potential and to bless the world with everything that God has given you. So salvation is all about not missing the mark. And it's that way that Rose feels that Jack saved her because she feels that if she had stayed in her place as a woman who was simply trying to comply with the wishes of her elders, that she would not have lived up to her potential. That's what she's talking about when she talks about Jack saving her. That's not a bad thing. That's a good thing. But you can see that this word salvation is a big word. It certainly means having God's favor, which is expressed in confidence at our death, that we will go to be with Christ. Paul talks about that in 1st and 2nd Thessalonians. We don't have any question about that. But the Christian life is also for saving us now and then. It's the whole thing. So back to the text. It is the power of God for salvation to everyone who has faith. Okay, so how is this gospel? Again, what is the gospel? Just real shorthand. When Paul goes to a Gentile synagogue, or not a Gentile synagogue, when Paul goes to a Jewish synagogue out in the diaspora, what does he tell his Jewish brothers and sisters about? Jesus is the Messiah. We know that because he rose from the dead and he now reigns in heaven over the world. That's the good news. That the world has a new king. Everyone says, well, I thought the world had a king. What king did everyone think the world had? Caesar. And Paul says, no, Jesus is Lord, not Caesar. Jesus is Lord over Caesar. Well, this is going to get complicated when we start talking about the Roman Empire in chapter 13. But the gospel, that Jesus is the Messiah, and so in fact, if your Messiah, okay, let's say Paul, Vanderclay, I've got to watch what I say because this is going out onto the internet and who knows who's going to hear what and understand it in what way. Paul Vanderclay is going to save the United States from, what should I save the United States from? COVID. Paul Vanderclay is going to save the United States from COVID. Well, if you would hear that, you would probably think, well, maybe Paul should be a epidemiologist or maybe Paul should be a scientific researcher or Paul should, because that's to save the country from COVID. Well, the focus of salvation will describe the manner of salvation. And because the focus of salvation here is so broad, it's positively absolute, the manner of salvation is going to also have to be broad. And that's actually built in, again, to Jesus is Messiah, Jesus is risen from the dead, Jesus is Lord. So a big part of the gospels is all about retooling our imagination in what Messiahship looks like and how we can participate in the salvation of this world. Well, that sounds very big. How can I participate in the salvation of this world? Now remember, salvation is going to scale. What we have here is the assertion that the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus instructs us in the salvation of this world from top to bottom. Although we're not like Jesus, we don't have the whole range. Probably many of you have participated in the salvation of your children. Now you might say, well, my kid isn't necessarily going to church. Okay, so maybe the salvation isn't complete, but if you were a good parent, tell me how you participated in the salvation of your children, at least some segments of their salvation. You taught them Bible stories. Okay, well let's even step away from the Bible. Did you teach them to tell the truth? Did you teach them to work hard at getting along with the people that they lived with? Did you teach them to not abuse? Did you teach them to sacrifice for the welfare of others? You probably taught them all that because I know many of your children, some of them are all grown up and in this room right now, but even if your child is not going to church, a lot of what you taught them about salvation is in them. Now it might not be this focus on religious salvation, but what we saw from the model of Jesus, in fact over the last 2,000 years, has gone out into the world and rewritten the moral expectations of the planet. This is what Jesus has done and he has done that through his people, even if they're not necessarily teaching Bible stories. Now again, I'm not saying you shouldn't teach your children Bible stories, but what I'm saying is that this salvation is deeper and further and reaches farther than we normally think about. I am not ashamed of the Gospel, Jesus' Messiahship, because even this Messiahship has a lot to do with this because, okay, I'm going to save the United States. I'm going to save the United States in the way Julius Caesar saved the Roman Republic. Well, how did Julius Caesar save the Roman Republic? Julius Caesar had legions under his personal command, and he fought other Roman legions had legions under his personal command, and he fought other Roman legions, and the Senate was forced to give him all kinds of titles, but then Julius wasn't real smart, because Julius says, well, I'm here to save the Roman Republic, but I'm really emperor. Psh. So they killed him. Why did Brutus kill Caesar? To save the Roman Republic. Wait, I thought Julius Caesar was saving the Roman Republic. Julius Caesar's trying to save the Roman Republic. Brutus is trying to save the Roman Republic. Caesar Augustus was far smarter. Caesar Augustus was always, I'm not emperor. It would be wrong for me to be emperor. We're a republic. We've got to save the republic. We've got to value the Senate, but everybody understood Caesar Augustus was emperor. They gave him all these titles. Would he refuse some of them? Oh no, you can't call me that. I'm just a citizen. I'm not an emperor, but the whole world knew he's an emperor. The manner by which, and he kept himself as emperor basically by killing his adversaries. The Pax Romana doesn't mean that nobody was killed or that nations weren't put down. The manner in which you try to save the world says everything about the way the world is. This is key to understanding Jesus as Messiah, because everybody expects Messiahs to put down their enemies. January 6th, we had a big hullabaloo. Why? But look what both sides were claiming. We're going to march into the, you know, go down to that capital or you're going to lose your country. Right? Isn't that what he said? And everybody in the capital said what? He's taking our democracy from us. They're both saying they're trying to save the country. What do they both have in common? What power are they wielding in order to save the world? The power of the sword, which is exactly what Julius Caesar used. It's exactly what Caesar Augustus used. And Jesus again and again points to the rulers of the world and says, they rule by a certain power, the power of the sword. Jesus goes into the garden of Gethsemane and he tells his disciples, bring some swords. Well, I guess it's going to get real. Peter pulls out a sword and strikes someone. And Jesus, you got to really appreciate how confusing he was to his disciples. Jesus says, put that away. And what does he say about the sword? Those who live by the sword die by the sword. This is not the way I am king. In Messiahship, in the way Jesus pursued Messiahship, Jesus began to save the world. Now we don't get this often because, you know, hey, the allies saved the world from Hitler by the power of the sword. And we don't get this often because, you know, hey, the allies saved the world by the power of the sword. Romans 13, Paul's going to say the state has the power of the sword. He's not saying that the power of the sword is illusory. He is going to say the power of the sword is insufficient to save the world to the depths that it needs saving. And that's why Jesus, well, I'm not ashamed of the gospel. Why not? Why are you not ashamed of the gospel, Paul? It is the power of God. Messiahship, resurrection, lordship. In the life of Jesus, we see the power of God for salvation. Salvation of what? Salvation of everything, top to bottom. We can usually do some work in saving little pieces. We're just us. So, all right, save your sheets. We'll come back to this. But try to remember what we talked about this week. So next week when I ask you, what is the gospel? Well, let's look at what Paul preached. Jesus is Messiah. He's a new kind of Messiah. Jesus is risen. He's vindicated. He's conquered death. Jesus is Lord. He is Lord, not Caesar. Caesar is Lord by the sword. He's got this little segment of the world over here. Jesus is Lord from top to bottom. Let's pray. Lord, even though we're Christians, we know that your salvation needs to permeate our whole life. And we know that there are many areas of our life that are unsaved. And we know, Lord, that many areas of our life will remain unsaved until we die. Until we die. But we believe that this salvation will one day be complete. It may not be complete in us until we die. And it will not be complete in the world until the second coming. But your salvation has continued on in this world. And we can see the evidence of it all over the place. Help us, Lord, to understand that it is the power of God for the salvation. And then we're going to talk about faith. Help us, Lord, to trust in you and believe in your salvation and hunger and thirst for the righteousness that you are giving. Hear our prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen.