https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=PBbhQbzm2X8

 Good. Well, there we go. Why don't you begin by telling me a little bit about yourself? Yes, well, so I live in the Netherlands, I'm 26 years old, and I live in the town of Kampen. So that's because I study here at the Theological University. I got married last year. My husband also studies at the university. He's studying to become a pastor and I'm just mostly interested in the academic side. Oh, wonderful. Yes. So, yeah, where should I begin? Anywhere you want. Were you raised in a Christian home? I wasn't. So, or at least I would say that I wasn't, I do not consider myself as coming from a Christian home. My parents got divorced when I was seven, and after that they stopped visiting church. And before that, it was also mostly just going through the rhythm, going through the motions, let's say. Yeah. Yeah. It's not unusual in a divorce. Church often gets the axe, at least in the first few years after the divorce. Yes. Yes, that's exactly what happened. So they weren't, the church wasn't, I don't think they were really nasty about the divorce, but they didn't really approve of it either. So yeah, that's just what happened. And while my mom, she kept a kind of a mixed blend of spirituality, a little bit of Christianity, a bit of Eastern spirituality and occultism. Well, that's actually kind of what drew me towards atheism, mostly because I didn't want to have anything to do with it. I was quite afraid of ghosts and stuff. So. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Well, you certainly didn't stay there. What happened? Well, what happened is when I was 16, I had a bit of a difficult childhood, of course, because of the divorce and all the adjustments that that took. I got into a relationship with a man that was quite a bit older than me. And we, I moved into his house when I was 18 and he had all kinds of issues like depression and mental illness and he couldn't work. So we had a very difficult time. And at some point, I realized that there that it was wasn't going to get any better. And then I kind of tuned out of the relationship and tuned into gaming. And yeah. So what happened was I got into this online community with that was into this multiplayer zombie game. And there was a man there and he was genuinely interested in other people. He seemed to care. He was intelligent. And we talked a lot, but he had very strange opinions. At least I thought so on topics like homosexuality and befores. And I just couldn't figure out what was up with the man. So then I asked him and he said, Well, I'm a Christian. I was like, Well, who's a Christian? I mean, that's stupid. Maybe I can help you, you know, like to become an atheist. And then he I don't know exactly. I don't remember how exactly it went, but I think he at some point made clear that I should give it a chance before I start critiquing it. And I actually thought, Oh, well, that's a fair point. I actually never really did give it a chance. So I started reading the Gospels and and I just believed what they what they said. And I still to this day can't explain why, because it rationally I just couldn't I couldn't compute it. But then I don't know for some reason I just believe that God existed. And then I had a problem, of course, because what should I do? So what what happened at that moment was that I got thrown out by my boyfriend, which wasn't which wasn't a negative thing per se. I was actually quite happy that that was the way things were turning out. And so I moved out and then I had to find a church because I was I was going I was doing research online. And I came across all these sermons and all these these pastors saying you need to go to church, you need to go to church. And I had no idea. I've never been to a church as an adult. So I remember that my manager at my workplace, he went to church. So I went and approached him and I said, Well, there's this thing, this weird thing has happened. And I think that God exists. And I read everywhere that I should go to church. So can you help me? And he did. And that was actually it was such an amazing experience because the church I went to the pastor was very spiritually tuned in. And he's still still a great friend of mine. And the people were very welcoming. And it was not at all what I thought church was when I wasn't a Christian. And how I ended up eventually going into seminary was that I at some point I realized that the Gospels were talking about Jesus and not about God. And I didn't think that was possible that the Gospels, you know, of course they are about Jesus, but I had heard them all the time just speaking about God. So I was introduced to a concept of the Trinity because Jesus is part of the Trinity. And I had no idea what to do with that because it's not the logical thing. And then I stumbled upon the five theological orations by Gregory Natsjansen. And that's the first theological Jesus I've ever read. And that's that's just I immediately thought I want more of that. This is so good. And so so that is why I ended up going to seminary and that's where I'm at right now. At your husband. Sorry, did you meet your husband at seminary then? Yes, I did. Yes. We accidentally lived together before we got into a relationship because he lived in a student housing and I moved into the same student house. So, yes. Wow. So, so what specifically are you studying in seminary? What's your focus? I'm a bit too spread out at the moment with my focus. So when I started seminary, it was just reformed theology. And that didn't appeal to me at all because they don't read Church Fathers except Augustine. And I just never really liked Augustine. So that was a bit of a problem. But my husband, he's a great guy. He introduced me to people like Jordan Peterson and Jonathan Pajot and and you, of course. So you guys, you have helped me get through seminary just by keeping theology fun. Yes. Wow. Wow. And now I actually last year I thought I should do something about this because I'm not going to spiritually. It wasn't going very well for me. And I needed to do something. So I did two things. I started taking classes in philosophy. And that helped tremendously because I had no idea that philosophy influenced theology so much. And I finally started making sense to me what I was doing in my studies in theology. And I took a minor in Orthodox Christianity. And that also changed things quite a bit because they do read the Church Fathers. Yeah, they do. So yeah, life has changed in the past year. Wow. Wow. Now, you got so you got married last year. You've been living a whirlwind. Yes. So where's this all going? I'm not sure. Actually, it's kind of what I'm wondering, wondering about right now. Yeah. Well, you're you're married. So you I mean, you're you've got some of these you've got some of these footings now. So whatever comes, you know, you have some pieces of it that are that are coming in. Well, what what grabbed you about the Church Fathers? Well, for one thing, the way they write, it's actually very accessible. So it's on a level, it's very deep and it's very spiritual. But it's also anyone, I think, can read them and understand where they're going. So at least if you have a decent translation, of course, because translations can mess things up. But you don't need to have vocabulary in mind with all the terminology they use. And it's not it's not like a science exactly what they're doing. OK. And that's really a piece of me. And it's always about God. And that is it's so strange that that that we can do theology without constantly talking about the relationship with God, because that was why I started, you know, liking the subject. Yeah. Yeah. Yes. That's fascinating. Well, what's on your mind? What did you want to talk to me about? Well, I wanted to talk about maybe like the dissonance between doing a bit more orthodox theology in my studies and finding that it's good for my spiritual life, but then not going to an orthodox church and actually not going to church at all. Very much because of COVID, but also just because it didn't speak to me anymore. Maybe it's a bit of a like, I should say rebellious move to not not go to church that often anymore and struggling with these actually theological issues like, for example, My church denomination, they see the Eucharist or the Lord's Supper as like what's more like Swinglian in sense that it's just a sign and there's no real presence. And then I think, well, that's not at least the way I think it should be and not all reform churches subscribe to that, but my local church does. And then I think, well, it's on the one hand, it's dishonest of me if I prescribe to another doctrine and still take the Lord's Supper. But if I don't do it, then people will start questioning like, is there something wrong? And I don't know if that's something I'm struggling with right now. I could imagine. This stuff is so hard. Well, you might think about the Lord's Supper and participation in a local church in a way analogous to how baptism is treated. So in the Christian Reformed Church, which is, you know, this, you probably know a little bit of Dutch history now in terms of church history. So the Christian Reformed Church is an offshoot of the, I'm probably butchering the Dutch pronunciation, but of the offskiting, which is this break in the, you know, in the, I think it was 1834, where de Kock, a lot of that, a lot of that schism was sort of an urban rural schism. And so you had the offskiting and then of course you had the doliance with Abram Kuyper. So that created this Christian Reformed Church that was fairly small in the Netherlands, but the immigration pattern to the United States was predominantly from those groups. And so that made the Christian Reformed Church, at least at the beginning of the 20th century, two or three times larger than the transplantation of the state church, which is the Reformed Church of America. So, so the Christian Reformed Church was a fairly conservative split off of the state church, but even so, it would, along with many other Christian churches, recognize baptisms done in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Now that's very interesting because for, especially in the early part of the 20th century, for all of the anti Catholicism and the Christian Reformed Church, a Christian Reformed Church still recognized a Roman Catholic baptism, which is kind of an interesting thing. And they'd recognize baptisms from any Trinitarian church. And so, if you think about now in any, just by virtue of when you live and where you live, and a whole bunch of other issues because attending a particular church kind of lands you in the middle of a very complex social matrix, which the more the more theologically educated you become, the more complex this is going to be. A lot of people just, you know, like the first time you went to a church, you asked your boss, and your boss went to a church. So you went to church, the same church as your boss, you didn't have a theological matrix, you didn't, you weren't paying attention to church fathers. I mean you were reading the Gospels and, you know, Jesus God, what's going on here, but you were just sort of engaging them. And I don't think that sort of, I don't, when I, when I use the word naive now I don't mean it in a pejorative sense. I mean it just that you only know what you know. And even though now you obviously have accumulated a lot more theological and philosophical understanding, you still only know what you know. I mean we're always only know what we know, we're human beings. So, the, so then suddenly, the more theological knowledge that you get, the more all along the way part of the learning of this theology and philosophy is sort of an appropriation. You've got opinions, you've got opinions, you know what, a Zwinglian approach to the, to the, to the Lord's Supper is and compare that to let's say more of a Calvinist real presence or a Lutheran or a Roman Catholic or, I mean you have all that knowledge now. Given where and when you live, your church options are going to be limited by time and space, and also limited by well now you're married. And so you're going to want to participate in a church with your husband. So now you've got his theological and philosophical opinions mixed in too. So, there's going to be a lot of compromise along the way. I don't think it is disingenuous to hold your personal theological beliefs in a degree of tension with the church that you are participating in. And the reason I say that is, if, if you can only participate in a church that perfectly aligns with all of your theological ideas, you will never participate in a church. And there is something that the more theologically educated you get. In many ways, the more the bigger a problem this is going to be. And, and I think in some ways. This is where I think CS Lewis's approach to mere Christianity was vital for his own participation and his own spiritual growth as an Anglican. I would find Lewis regularly complaining about his church and we can imagine this, because he didn't like the music. He didn't like the songs. I would imagine he often didn't like the preaching, because here's this guy who, you know, is absolutely brilliant knows all this stuff is better educated than the preacher. He circles around everything that's going on. But here's the theological here's the spiritual danger. He's full of himself. And so, finding submitting to a church, a situation that for you, you've got all kinds of questions you've got all kinds of opinions, but yet at some point. You don't want these ideas and opinions to become idolatrous. You don't, in other words, want to create this perfect image of a church in your mind that really only exists in your mind. So it's so you're you're I appreciate the spot that you're in, and I actually, you know, so so part of what happened with this channel was of course I started making videos and people started coming to me, and usually not publicly too often but they started complaining about their church options. And then sometimes people would, I gotta be really careful mode, we're going to say about this, then sometimes people would come and they would say watch the live stream at living stones, or they come and visit. And they're like, boy I listened, I listened to hours and hours and hours of Paul. But then when I go to his church. What were they expecting that the church would be a reflection of that this would that living stones would be the Paul Vanderkley show. No, it is not. I don't pick the music. I submit to my elders. I. And in fact in many ways in terms of the local church. I want the people at this church to use their spiritual gifts to shape this church, and to not have this church be our tyrannical reflection of my ideas. I've already got tremendous influence in the church obviously because I'm preaching in it. But the church does not belong to me it belongs to Christ and his body. And so, at a certain point, I have to submit to that body with all of the. Do I really like that song. Do I really like what this person is doing over here. Do I really agree with what's going over there. And as a local church, you know, I just shut up about that stuff. And I do it. Now after years of doing it. I do it joyfully, because what brings me more joy is seeing the body of believers, worshiping and serving their God. You know, I don't always agree, and I always think it's the best, but they're offering their best to the Lord, and I will encourage them to do that. And I will not make the church, a reflection of me. So now you're not in that same position. But at some point, you're going to have to figure out that see the difficulty is and I meet a lot of Christians who. They're really smart. They're better educated, maybe than the pastor. They've got a whole lot of reasons why, and their arguments are good and right and they got a lot of good points. This church is this church is doing it badly. But what church does is, it's our devotion to it is a reflection of our submission to Christ. And right, that is healthy spiritually for us because what it actually does is opens us up, because I, You know what tends to happen is this is so true of pastors, especially when they retire, because they become critics, they sit there in church, and they're just critics of everything that happens, and you can't worship. When you're criticizing, because at some point you have to say, you have to shut off the critic and say, God has called me to love these people. And what love always means is, and you know this now that you're married. You know, while you're in your first year, I mean, you've just started finding fault with your husband, trust me, it'll continue. And he will continue to find fault with you. And the thing about the marriage is you learn to love. Even, you know, I joke with my wife now because things that I used to find annoying. I now sort of not all of them. I sort of find them adorable. Because their expressions of her. And what happens over time is that love changes that and so there are things here in my own church that sometimes I see him and part of me wants to roll my eyes. Another part of me finds it adorable, because that's living stones. It's not me. So, this is part of a journey of spiritual maturity that you're on. And now hopefully you'll have some options in terms of what you can pick from. Because it doesn't mean, you know, just like in a marriage, it doesn't mean you just have to constantly live with no, no there's negotiation involved, you'll get a chance to exert your influence but it always has to be done in love, because the primary thing to keep in mind is the church doesn't belong to you, it belongs to Christ. And, and, well, I'm, I show my Protestant reform nature here when I say, in many ways that's an expression of his people. And I think there's some theological differences there with some of the other traditions but I don't know, I don't know if that answer is helpful at all. Yes, definitely. Thank you. Yes, I, I, I heard you say before like the people went to your church and then they were kind of disillusioned maybe or at least surprised. Yeah, and I always kind of had to think well, I, I, when I first went to a church I went to a church like your church and it was a small church and I loved it, because the people I could actually get to know the people and they got to know me. And that's part of why the reason why I have a struggle with going to church now it's that church is just too big, and it's, and it's a family church so there are a lot of people who are very busy. And I know I'm a student, and I sometimes feel and this may be his projection but I've also heard other people say this that if they know your student they don't build up a relationship because they know you're going to go away again in a few years and there's always new and there's always new students coming in. Yeah, and that just was such a big difference with the church with that I had left behind that I, I felt I had to take a step back because I just couldn't do it. And then I'm now at that point where I think okay well should I should I start re engaging. But then, in what way because I don't really feel like I have a place there and, and actually my husband had a very similar experience he was much more active than I was he really genuinely tried but then. But it's not it's not that it's a bad church I mean there are a lot of people in the church that I really appreciate and I think are deeply spiritual and they, they do make it into a really a church of God, but then I struggle with how do I adjust. How do I submit in a way that it's not just going through the motions but that I'm actually just that I'm also actually a part of the body. Yeah, and, yeah. And I think, and there will also probably be seasons in your life where I mean because, and now if your husband is going to be a pastor, then you're going to have a whole nother set of issues, because a pastor's wife is also sort of always often not always kind of alienated from the church to. It's hard and if the church is small, much less so. But you're sort of, if you're the pastor's wife you're sort of the first lady. And so there are privileges and opportunities for that but there are also problems with that so it's, it's. There are no perfect marriages there are no perfect churches there are no perfect relationships in churches, and sometimes just as you described I'm so glad you had a good experience earlier in a church, and I, I, I often recommend to people to find a small church for exactly that reason. Most people don't most at least in America. The majority of Christians go to large churches. But I generally think that's a mistake. The small church has so much more opportunity, even though the other program isn't going to be great and the music might not be great. There'll be a whole lot of things not great about it, but what is great about it is it's, especially someone coming from the kind of story that you had where your parents broke up and I mean it sounded like at that point in your life you really needed a family, and that's what a small church can be. Yes, yes I really experienced that and it was. It was really transforming, because I had not thought that that was possible, like, also just having the example of people staying in a marriage. I feel like my parents divorced again but that that pattern was just really apparently graved in deep in my psyche, that that is just what people do. And then there are these people that sometimes fight, but then they make up again, and then. Okay, so that is, that is also how things can go. I'm still so thankful that I had that that other example because I didn't have that previously and it's not like I grew up without loving people because my parents they are very loving people and they had their faults but then again I also have my faults but yes the church it does really make a difference. It does. It does. That's very true. I hope. So I would say yeah in terms of your, you might have some theological differences with the church but I think it's, it's, it's when you participate in the Lord's Supper when you partake of the Eucharist. You are partaking, I'm going to reveal some of my Protestantism here but you're partaking in the Eucharist of the church, you're, you're, it's Christ, it's the Lord's Supper it's Christ's body and blood. It's not that not doesn't belong to the local church it belongs to Christ. And so it might be coming to you through that local church and there might be issues theological issues locally that you disagree with but it's Christ is coming to you through that body. I think in many ways, Christ came to you through that small church and he came to you and he showed you what marriage could be and what I mean Christ, Christ comes to us through the church and through other people. And, and that's how he, you know, that's how he ministers to us and through others so there there there might very well be issues but as long as it's Christ's church. That's okay you know I think about, I don't know how much, you know, Sam on in the discord community and he's in the comments sections a lot under Sam Adams. He's a, he's a Unitarian so he doesn't believe in the Trinity, but he's kind of an evangelical Unitarian and so my conversations with him that are on my channel, you know, he really struggles with. He goes to Trinitarian churches and, you know, and then finally, when they find out he's a Unitarian Oh gosh what to do with Sam and Sam's got to figure out what to do with the church, and, you know, yeah what I love Sam to give up the give up his cause and become a Trinitarian of course but, you know, we live in this world with all kinds of things like that. And so, yeah. It's a great question I'm glad you asked it and I hope, I hope we get to share this video because a lot of people struggle with this and I talked to a lot of people privately who struggle with this and, you know, and I do as a local church pastor I deal with it all the time because people come and go, or they come for a while and they're like no pastor I really need a different church, and I bless them. Because I understand. It's hard though. I mean it's it's hard if you're a small church you know that I haven't been in a small church because every time some new person comes. It's a big deal and everyone comes around them. And so when they go it's like oh they're leaving it's like losing a member of the family. Yes, I must, I can't yeah it's, I can't imagine why you would leave a small church but of course everyone has has their reasons and I, I can imagine that those for those people. Well they had their reasons, but it just seems like such a blessing if you have a tight community in which everyone knows you and like you know who's playing the organ, and you know who is, I don't know singing badly, but you know the, they have other qualities and exactly Yeah, it's really is like a big extended family in a way. Yeah, and I kind of miss that now but then again I think maybe if I've at the very first, I think year that I was studying, I was really struggling with this and it was, it was keeping me awake, maybe even at night, and then at some point I just thought I have to sit this out and wait until I move again because it's not going to happen here during my studies. And I think recently, also through engaging with Orthodox theology, I think the question started being introduced again because I feel like I can be a Christian on my own and of course I'm with my husband and he, he's, he's facing the same struggle that I am, of not really fitting in and struggling to find his place. Also, of course, because he is studying to become a pastor so there's always this, this distance between, between us and the community in a sense. And how to, how do you do that as a pastor like, is it just a matter of keeping your prayer life healthy and keep and reading or do you have like friends that are not part of the congregation but do help you spiritually or what's it like for you? All of the above. So, pastoring can be kind of a lonely thing because just as you said, you're part of the church but sort of not a part of the church. Again, in a small church here, it's a little bit easier. I've been here. Let's see, it'll be 24 years this August. And so it is very much a family and I dearly love these people. And they love me. And so it's, that's, that's a huge part of it. Spiritually, it's just as you described, it's your prayer life, it's friendships. It's, and I've always derived a lot of different people, people take spiritual sustenance in different ways. So, so previous pastor here who was a friend of mine, he was retired. He just passed away this last year. You know, he would often do retreats. And so I've known pastors who are big on retreats and they can't go six months without taking a week away just as a spiritual retreat. Me, you know, for me, I derive a lot of spiritual benefit from the kinds of things I do with my channel. And I like thinking about ideas and reading books and I love studying the Bible. For me, for me, my, I'm fortunate in that my, my sermon prep, you know, a lot of pastors will warn other pastors, you know, about sermon prep, because that can cut both ways, and I find it different with different pastors. But for me, I find my sermon preparation very spiritually satisfying and filling. I would find it now. You know, so I'm a third generation minister and so I got to watch my father go through various stages too, even though I didn't know I was watching him. But I'm probably going to be like my father and that I find it spiritually very satisfying to minister. And so, whether it's relating to people. You know, maybe it's the Freddie and Paul show it's my relationship with people at the church it's sermon preparation. I find that all very, very satisfying but different, different ministers are different. And I've known some who have been in, been in the job 2030 years and they need to get out of it just to have their spiritual lives restored. So it varies tremendously. But yeah, it is being a minister can be hard on one's relationship with Jesus, for some, but not not always for others, it's very individual. And, and you probably you and your husband probably won't know this until you start getting into it and learning and figuring out how to do it. I've, I've often found having friends outside the church is important. And for me also, we have a close colleague group of another colleague and and I collaborated very early on here and planting a lot of other CRC churches. And then so we have this group of local ministers who are colleagues that are also very helpful, but everything you just described and I think for everyone piecing it together. Suiting to taste is is important. That's good to know. Thank you. Yes, well my husband I mustn't forget to pass on his appreciation of what you do online and of course, I also very much appreciate the community that you're sustaining. And he's, he's listened to a lot of your conversations, and he's learned a lot. Also for his, his own pastoral experience, just how to how to engage with the next generation, let's say. For example, I do a lot of things for my university, regarding the, the education program. And he said, Well, maybe you should start thinking about how do you engage the community online kind of like what you're doing. Because this is something we're not trained in right now in seminary, but this is probably a growing medium for for pastoring and spiritual engagement. And, and I think it's, he's right and we should pay attention to it but then again and there's also a bit of a resistance inside of me that says, no people should just go to a community. I think we're talking because I mostly get my stuff online as well but then it just, it just won't compare to to to worship. Yeah, yeah. That's, it's, it's too. It's too. Well, it's too early for summit for this. And what what's happening right now what I'm doing, what others are doing. It's too early to really generate a lot of wisdom. We haven't, we're still in the trial phase. We haven't learned from our failures yet. We haven't. We haven't had enough big catastrophic failures yet to know that's a bad path. Don't do that. And so we're sort of guinea pigs. We're test pilots right now, but you're right. It's, it's, it's going to be unavoidable, and we have no idea. The formations and malformations and opportunities that this new. These new media will offer. And so it's very very early days. You know, again in some ways it's sort of akin to, you know, the Protestant Reformation. I mean, I mean, I think it's a little bit of a different story. Exactly. Columbus discovered America 1492 Luther Wittenberg door 1517. You know, I'd never put those two dates together but you know the book I read recently it was like, yeah, that world was changing fast. So, yeah, these are all good questions and online is going to be an aspect of many churches but you're right, there's, there's nothing, a local relationship is vital. And in lots of different ways. You can ghost online so easily. It's, you can do it locally, but it's, it's, it's harder, and the, the betrayal is more obvious. Right. Yes, and then again I must say that what I've what I've had online by listening to, to, to sermons to lectures. It's given me so much more. I think maybe I should say understanding of God and also hesitate to say spiritual growth because I do think that that is something you do through prayer. And so, reading theology can sometimes also be mental prayer is good theology really does bring God close. And it is such an amazing time in which we live like you have so much information at your fingertips it's almost hard to decide what to engage with, and what not to engage with. I really engaged a lot with Jordan Peterson, and I still appreciate a lot of what he does. But it's radically different from how you engage with orthodox theology and the Church Fathers, and how you engage with people like Kelvin and Luther, which I think are the reform Church Fathers if I may. Yeah, yeah, that's that's who they are. Yeah, that's a very Protestant terminology is a bit different but. And how do you, if you're not actually educated in things like that how do you even begin to decide what is true. I mean, there's also often something that that that people are looking for like, but what actually is the truth. I mean, I really deeply admire the people that are going through questions like that right now because it's very difficult to to to grapple with these kinds of things. Oh, it is, it is, and you're right, I too have. So, so I'm, I'm a bit dyslexic, which means that I mean I can read, but reading for me is a little slower than listening. And for me as well. Yeah. So, once, I mean, very early on, once MP threes were out there on the internet. I was downloading sermons and downloading talks, and I, you know, I wasn't really adept at YouTube until Jordan Peterson and then suddenly I get up to speed on YouTube. And now of course with smartphones. And now with audio books. It's just, it's just exploding but you're right it's we're our challenges now are very much in, you know, relevance realization, which book to read where to put my time, because you know I've got a kindle library of 1000 books I've got a physical library of, you know, many more books. I've got an audible library of a couple hundred books. YouTube new content comes out all the time. So a lot of it is okay, how it can't all be the latest video the latest conversation that puts you in the silo the now Church Fathers are nice because that broadens you to older conversations in a reformational Church Fathers. And there you've got kind of a critical hinge in terms of the world we're living in right now, especially, you know, seminary and in Coppin, which has its own history. And I don't know a lot of it but I know, you know, little entails of it from my own Dutch reformed education so you know you've got you've got lights like bovink and Kuiper who are out there and their form tradition, who are sort of, you know, peak of modernity, and you sort things out. And now it's, it's. And now you know I it's, I think it's tremendously. I'm always an optimist but you know the fact that you know orthodoxy is coming online. Here's a whole. There's a whole treasure of, of Christian wisdom that for the most part the West. You know didn't avail itself of, and probably what we'll be seeing in the next couple of hundred years as much more integration of the Church Fathers into the Western tradition. And so, you know, with all of, because orthodoxy didn't go through, you know, the Protestant Catholic division and then into modernity, but, you know, someone like Jonathan Peugeot. But he's also a person with a zip code. It was born. He's at least, you know, 10 years younger than I am so all of those layers come to the fore, and orthodoxy will also be changed, even though it's a, it's a tradition. Absolutely. Oh yeah, that is actually quite quite a big topic right now within the Orthodox Church so I've, I've the last for the last year I studied with the Orthodox, and that has really changed. And also my, my idea about the Orthodox Church and orthodox theology as a as a whole because you cannot know orthodoxy through Jonathan by show. And it is he, I absolutely admire what he does, and he doesn't say things that are heretical or anything, but orthodoxy just goes so much deeper. And it's actually, I wouldn't, I'm, people are not going to like me for saying this but it's not that different from Protestantism. And I was so surprised to find out. And of course it's different because they are liturgical and they do think differently about certain dogmas, but really, there are so much similarities, I had never expected that. And I, I'm, I'm currently trying to, to see if maybe it's possible to, to see if there's some kind of meeting points, a point of contact between the traditions but that's that's difficult. So someone like, for example, Father John beer. He is an orthodox priest, and he's written quite a lot of books that are widely appreciated by both the Protestant and the, the orthodox tradition. And he's one of the people who can do that, you know, in a very genuine manner, it's not not critical at all. He's also been one of my teachers so I was very fortunate to study under him but I think it would be great if there were more people that were would try that because I think both traditions would benefit from that. I think it's possible. At least, I don't think they can merge, at least not yet, like become one I don't, I don't even know if we should want that, but it's not an antithesis between orthodoxy and Protestantism per se, especially with the Church Fathers, I think. That's very interesting. That's very interesting. I agree with you to that. The, I mean the questions of, let's say structure ecclesiastical structure and unity are very interesting questions. And of course, Protestants have sort of majored and trying to figure out a lot of those things because we've been so fractious that what tends to happen is that well then you, then you wind up okay I was, I was in this church for a while then I was in this church and how are they the same church and all those questions like we started with okay you're you're you're participating in communion with this local communion. What does that mean, where is Christ, how, how does Christ work through these, these traditions, these individual believers, the specific church. These are all, all good, challenging questions. So, we have we have about five more minutes and so I usually give like a five minute warning in case that there's, there's something that you wanted to get to but we haven't gotten to yet. Oh well I think that that's what we've discussed so far has already helped quite a bit. I think that's something you said about being part of the community and that the community. Although it may not entirely align with what you think you can still be a part of it. I think for me the biggest struggle with that was more a matter of conscience consciousness. No conscious conscience conscience. Yes, exactly. Thank you. The English of the Dutch blows me away I can't speak like a Dutch and my parents could but not me. Yeah. So, because I, on the one hand, I was thinking well I should have a clean conscious, if I, if I participate in the church and it will be. If I don't have. If I don't have that I will be disingenuous. And that, that's not, that's not fair towards the church because the church also has a bit of authority and I do want to submit to that authority so how far should I take that. Yeah, that's a relief. Really, it is a bit of a relief to me that it doesn't have to be perfect. At least maybe that was where I was maybe asking a bit too much of myself and of the church. And, and probably you know if if your, if your husband does take a church and again, then you're not going to have a lot of choice because there's limited options that are calling him and I mean because that's a whole nother layer to this often, again, have a good develop a good group of friends. And I think about my mother. You know she has. And she has some lifelong friends from, you know, the church in Patterson that we that my father spent 36 years and and and all of the churches and so friendships are in some friendships can in some ways be like tiny little churches, especially if for a variety of other reasons. And so the relationship with the church is complicated by employment by necessities of various sorts. So, but if you if you're, you know, don't make don't make don't make the perfect the enemy of the good. And, and I'm sure you've got plenty of me, the Dutch have such wonderful proverbs so I'm sure you have a good for that. I don't doubt it. I can't think of one right now. Definitely, for those who don't know the Dutch you know that's that's like my friend john been Donk and Joe, you know all these, all these Dutch sayings and too bad, you know, I, because, because of I grew up in Patterson and not in a real fix CRC community I don't have. I don't have as much Dutch as as others, even if my generation so that's the way it goes. Yeah, it must be a unique position to be so acquainted with the Dutch culture but then live in America because I kind of mentioned that two are quite different. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, I always think of the Dutch as a bit it's a bit like the hobbits are like the Shire. Yep. It's so very homely and, but also a little bit crass sometimes. But there's so much freedom in this country I often forget just how how free we are and it's not, it's not for nothing that so many theologians that came to the Netherlands, and that's so deeply ingrained in our culture. Yes, and yes it's it's a unique, unique place to be. It is, it's wonderful. Well I'm so glad Sarah that you persevered and got a rando slot. I know it's hard. But I do, I do keep them open and not all the video surface so I will. I will send this video to you and you can watch it with your husband and if you give me the thumbs thumbs up I'd be happy to share it on my channel so thank you so much for the opportunity and thank you for for keeping open these these random slots because I think that's, that's a real is really helpful for the people. Thank you. All right, well take care and God bless you both. Thank you. Okay, bye bye. Bye.