https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=wKZr0cPeJWg

 Yeah, you sound great. You sound great. And, and yeah, thanks for sending me the email. And so I got to rewatch our first conversation, which was, you know, almost exactly a year ago. Yes, I, I realized that after I set this one up and realized, oh, I'm two days off, which for anyone that knows me, being a little bit anal retentive about time is very on brand for me. Well, it's a great conversation, our first conversation. And what's nice is that, again, I mean, sometimes I have a kind of oh, I got to find that thing, but you, you sent it to me, which was really helpful. And so yeah, now we don't have to sort of go back over what we went back, what we covered last time we can keep going. That's exciting. Yeah, I don't know what you had in mind for today. But the time is your Yeah, it's cool. Cool, cool, cool. So I was going to so so as I, you know, started thinking about I'd like to try and get another conversation again, and then spotted a slot, which is always sort of surprising. But that was that was good. So what do I talk about? I stumbled on to your channel, right? Pretty soon after you got started. I think it was right after your your first talk with Jonathan Bejeux that I first found you and so it's been close to three years now. And I started thinking, why on earth am I still watching Paul after three years, which, you know, I isn't he map territory by this point? I obviously say very much tongue in cheek. But it's a good question, to me, at least because, you know, there's there's a ton of internet fads out there and interesting things that you get into and then not too too much later, too much longer, you drift away because they don't hold your interest for that long. So absolutely, the things that do, I think are are interesting. So as I put some thought into it, I think it's where I'm going to go with this is I'm not sure it is necessarily the content so much. So I think obviously, there's lots of good, good content, good topics. I really enjoy a lot of a lot of the conversations that you do. I like those just about as much as the monologue sometimes when you get the interesting people. But I think it is perhaps what I might call the the shape of how you do it or just the the way that you do these things that is interesting to me. And it's been something that I want to try and perhaps ah, emulate to some extent, and it this all sounds very, very, very much sucking up to the host and I don't necessarily want to go that way. You get not you don't get a lot sucking up to this host. I can't make you rich. I can't make you that famous. Listening to your talk with Brett the other day, and you know, I've heard you made the comment a couple times before of you know, being glad that you didn't get into this earlier in life just with the way that this stuff works, the kind of of adulation that social media can give to a person. So I don't necessarily want to do that. But I think that you and maybe and not necessarily just you but but the the sort of other other people in this world that I have stumbled on to through you, obviously, Jonathan, but Alistair Roberts and Glenn Scrivner and so many of these people that are that are kind of doing similar things and all the randos who haven't given as much time to because there's only so much time to sit and watch YouTube. But a lot of folks doing kind of the same thing. So without having it high, what is that thing? So I'm just going to start Oh, yeah. No, tell me please, I'd love to know going. I'm going to start going on some of my thoughts with this and just sort of start to ramble. So if, if anything, you know, starts use interesting by all means, interrupt and we'll see what we take. So I take notes during these things. So keep going. I want to hear I want to know what's going on because I'm not exactly sure. Yeah, I think. So the first thing that I have really much really appreciated from this sort of orbit of the world is thinkers and talkers and YouTubers is not everything has to be a fight. So much of political discourse today and not even today. It's just been coming out of say, campus ministry, like I did got involved in my, my campus church early in college, a lot of that was what was confrontational to some degree. And I don't necessarily look back badly on it. But it's all kind of tense sometimes and you're you're always looking to be the smartest person and you got you got to win that argument because if the atheists win, God might not be real, or whatever the case may be. And some, sometimes maybe, I mean, confrontational might not be exactly the right word, but just evangelistic techniques that can be somewhat somewhat in your face. And I say it was, it bore fruit and it had its use. But I've really enjoyed the fact that sometimes you can just come together with people and talk. And you don't have to try and win an argument, you can just learn from from folks, I think what, what weird sort of world do we live in where somebody like Jonathan Peugeot can have a conversation with somebody like rationality rules and have it, if not a productive conversation, at least something that is enlightening. And, you know, it's a very different, different, different spirit, I guess you could say, than has existed for, for a long time, certainly, it's not the the go to route for, for YouTube and social media, because you get a always always be closing, always be owning the libs, always be destroying whoever it is that you're going to destroy. So that has been one. I'll pause there. You jump in. I think that's good. I think it's great. Amen. Amen. Not everything has to be a fight. We have way too many fights right now. And why? What are we fighting over? What are we trying to win? You know, don't you know, is it is, is it a zero sum game? Really? No, excellent. Excellent. I love it. Keep going. Yeah. Cool. Let's see. I think I thought there was something else that I was gonna tack on to that. Anyway, it'll come back to me. As I as I said in the comment that you pinned on our last video, my brain works at about 75% of conversation speeds. So sometimes things get lost and we got we got to jump back. But make it through. Yeah. Um, let's see. Other things are it's okay not to know. So this very much goes in with the the first point that I was never I never exactly came out of particularly confessional Christianity. So but but nonetheless came out of Protestantism very much a propositional kind of Christianity and very much concerned with I have to know the right things. And I have learned from a lot of these kind of conversations is that you just well, for one, you just can't know. And that's okay. And it is not it is not my my right theology any more than my my good works that are going to save me. And that it can be a little unnerving at times, but also liberating, I guess, to some extent, that it's like, Oh, yeah, I don't know everything. People have been fighting over this question for 2000 years. Do I more than that really have the the correct answer here? That's very true. Yeah. Yeah. That's great. That's great. I love your list so far. This is awesome. Because it's right. It's okay. Well, and and it even saying it's okay not to know is a is actually a profession of faith. Faith as trust. Yeah. Because, you know, any any of our relationships, I mean, any any human being is is any human being you come across is too great to know, you cannot know, you know, let's say your spouse, you know, your spouse, possibly better than any other person in the world, or your children. And you cannot know enough about any of them to exhaust them. And so any relationship is a is a is a walk of faith, and especially a committed relationship. So no, that's great. It's okay not to know. And in fact, you can't know. So so continuing further is a walk of faith. So that's great. Great. Keep going. You're doing great. I love it. Cool. All right. So I think that ties into to some degree with those your Matthew McConaughey talk the other day, bright line grime line, that I think, for both of these points, and I think probably a lot of what will come after is that a lot of people are just weary with having to fight, having to know, and just being able to come to a place where I can just let my guard down a little bit. And if I'm wrong about something, most of the people here aren't going to jump on you. Sometimes maybe the discord circle get a little spicy. But for the most part, people are going to be, you know, like, they'll disagree, but it's like, okay, well, whatever, you don't know, I don't know. So that's good. I think, be it be it fundamentalist Christians or fundamentalist atheists, or whatever, everybody's, everybody's trying to build their brand and push their ideas and, and recruit you to their tribe. And it's, it's just sort of relief to have, have that grace to not, not have to just double down on things and constantly be. Yeah, sticking to your guns. So first two, and I think the, the opposite side of these that I I very much like looking for balance and in anything that I think through. So kind of the other side of both of these is, you know, eventually, you do need lines, eventually, things do need to turn into a fight to some extent. And finding where those lines are is sort of the, how shall I then live of, of this, because, obviously, you know, I'm, I still hold some theological and philosophical convictions, I know that you do as well. And I think, perhaps, a topic that, that I know, the Orthodox are into has been, is, it's been a good bit of sort of branching out into different traditions, is their obsession, it's maybe too far, but maybe not far enough with hierarchy. And I don't fully grasp what it is that they're so, so into about that. But I think that to some extent, it's okay to in this estuary, which is more I think about your sort of sort of word picture there, it's okay to not have those lines out here in where, where the river and the creek and the swamp and everything are flowing into this one deal. And it's, it's, it's okay in, in this area, to not have the fight and to not have the, not have the hard lines. So that's, that's one way of getting of getting after the how do I avoid just turning into a blob of mush and I don't believe anything. Not believing anything is still kind of believing something. So you got to, you got to have some sort of what forward, forward motion or whatever analogy you want to use to, to not just be going with whatever current you happen to fall into. So, you know, in the estuary is one place maybe as you get closer, so to speak to the church or the family or whatever domain, then you need to start to choose where those fights are. So that's well, it's, it's a, there's a, there's an interesting relationship between a person's, a person's internal security, integrity and cohesion and their ability to be in a place where the lines are grimy or not terribly distinct. And part of the reason people demand hard lines, bright lines, clean lines is because they need, they need to borrow that hardness and brightness and cleanness from their environment because they don't have enough of that themselves. And it's, it's, it's ironically, people who, who know themselves and are secure in themselves to a sufficient degree that they can actually tolerate the kinds of messiness and ambiguity that you'll have in an estuary because they, the estuary is outside of them and not, and there, there isn't chaos within, but there's peace within. And, and that peace within, you know, this is where we get into this. Tomorrow, I'm going to talk to Mark, who's been active in the question of whether John Vervecki's four peas of knowing are sufficient. And, well, you know, John, John proposes a scheme and I think the scheme helps us and brings us down the road. But part of the enjoyment of a scheme as well, let's find a better scheme and let's perfect this scheme and sharpen the scheme. And so that's, that's kind of the game that's afoot. But, but this, the, how, how we navigate in a space with respect to these, we'll just use John's four peas for now, the, you know, the propositional proposition is always sort of third person. It's, it's sort of out there. It's got thingness, but then the, the participatory, well, that's much more second person. The procedural is much more, you know, how, and the, and the perspectival, well, that's, you know, that's, it's the perspectival and that, that is really Mark and a bunch of these people are pushing on because that question of perspective is I can only know you from where I'm standing as me. And, and then I need usually mediating models that are inside of me so that I can hopefully perceive you something outside of me. I mean, this all gets very, very messy. And so, you know, all of your, all of your, your ideas contribute to that. It's not everything has to be a fight. Well, sometimes if you my, my wife was a little tired of some other things. And so she pulled up the movie about the tsunami. And I'm like, this is what you want to watch? You know, really, and you, you have this, you know, so you have this, this tsunami coming through and it takes these bodies, human bodies, and, and then all the other material through the water and just whoosh. And so now you've got hard and soft and hard winds over soft and, you know, skin gets penetrated and not everything has to be a fight. And sometimes fights are important. It's okay not to know sometimes you have to know there's all these dualities around these things. And, and so in many ways, wisdom is, is sort of knowing the times and knowing what to do with the time that you're in, and whether to be hard or whether to be soft and whether to be rigid or whether to be flexible and, and it's so, so difficult to know these things. But, you know, I think I think part of the reason that the Orthodox and their, their fascination and acknowledgement of hierarchy is so timely is because we're in an age that all this equality, you know, it's, it's things, things elicit and invite their opposite so often. And the more the more something goes down here, the stronger they will, they will call from over here. And, you know, there's this, there's this way to the universe and that. And so yeah. And I guess, I guess for me, you know, the, you know, the Weinsteins are are out there, you know, sometimes with their hair on fire, and I don't have much hair left. So wouldn't have wouldn't make much of a fire light it anyway. But there's, we do navigate these things. And we sometimes, sometimes we're attracted to the reaction. I'm, you know, I use this illustration often in Patterson where I grew up, when there'd be a fight, you'd, you'd see this whole crowd of people in the middle of the street. And then you just know that there's a fight, because there's, you know, maybe started out with two kids, and then their moms got involved. And maybe it's the two moms that are fighting, where's all neighborhoods coming out of their houses, because they want to watch the fight. And so just we, it's a very reasonable thing for human beings to be attracted to a fight, because we want to know what danger or goodness is coming into our purview. And so we have to watch fights, and we watch them very carefully. And we look for winners. And so that's now that we have created these attentional economies, it's, it's no, it's no mystery that conflict is king in an attentional economy. Then it's, of course, we get exhausted in that because our fight or flight mechanism just keeps getting ramped up. And, oh, please take me to quiet waters. And so yeah, yeah, yeah, no, I guess. And so, you know, my channel isn't without, you know, every, actually, I tend to pick, I tend to pick fights on other social media, and I usually sort of poke at people a little bit, and usually to try to get their attention, because I think, well, maybe, maybe a more productive conversation, it can be had. And if someone's in, if someone's in reactive mode, it's like, well, they've got all their buttons on the surface here, I'll press one. So no, these, this is a great list. I really like this. And I think, because I, you know, every, oh, gosh, it's at least a couple times a month, I sit down and I ask myself, why am I doing this? You know, this is, this is insane. This, this, you know, why don't I just shut the whole thing down and be a normal pastor again? And then another part of me is like, what? No, you're not going to do that. This is, this is one of the coolest things, chapters you've had in your life, you're gonna, you're gonna keep going with this, and you should, but it's, it's, you know, the, as always, it's the people that are the real, that are the real treasures in all of this. Yeah. My wife and I are always trying to find the right kind of TV mixture for, you know, the last thing we do in the day, because she wants to sort of, I can, I can fall asleep during this during the news or during some combative movie. But my wife is like, No, I want something that's gonna settle down. And so we, we uploaded the PBS channel on our smart TV, and we started watching James Harriot's All Things. All Creatures Great and Small, a masterpiece theater adaptation of it. And, and, you know, I loved it, or in the first episode where the, the, the veteran, veterinarian says to the assistant, he says, Well, you know, the animals, animals are wonderful. It's the people you got to watch out for. It's like, that's exactly right. But it's also the people that make it wonderful. So it's, yeah, no, I love your list. I love your list. Keep going. All right. Set everything on there. All right. Next one, I think that has been helpful that I think it counterintuitively, I think helps build your channel or at least building it. But sustain it, let's say it's not it's by no means the fastest growing channel on YouTube and which is I think probably a very good thing. Yes, it is. But again, a comment that you made quite a while ago now, just just a little offhand thing that stuck in my head when somebody asked, Oh, why don't you try and get so and so on your channel is like, it's that's just playing a status game. It's trying to get somebody high status on my channel so that I can then build my status and, and then, you know, do the whole thing. And so I think to some extent, we are in in the social media ecosystem. We're all just kind of worn out on like, share and subscribe and, and playing status games and all that. And I think it's the fact that it's just you talking with weirdos on the internet and coming on and rambling about something that interests you. And you are old enough and experienced enough and have seen enough of the grime to know where that sort of thing leads. There is a certain degree of to say realness is, is almost cliche. But it's the kind of thing that people that are burnt out on social media culture, and status culture and hype culture. It's very refreshing to listen to you or, you know, go watch one of the randos or, you know, a John Verbeke kind of, kind of hokey, poorly produced talk or whatever. And it's just, it's just people that are genuinely interested in something going out there to try and, and just learn more and engage and meet people. And there is just a kind of honesty to it that is engaging to people that are burnt out on, on this very fast paced life that we live in these days. Yeah. Now I agree. I, you know, I often will have people say, Oh, you should get this author on and I'm, and I like getting authors on. And, you know, there are some authors out there I would like to have a conversation with and some of them I could probably get on my channel. But refreshing is the right thing. Because when, when two high status people get together, they they often have to, the conversation is a means to an end. And when randos get together, well, maybe there's some ambition and hope that maybe they'll gain another dozen subscribers. But once you've gained a dozen subscribers, you realize a dozen subscribers is nothing, you know, there's a woman out there has a beautiful channel of gardening and making this making a meal for a Chinese woman making a meal for her mother with, you know, millions of subscribers. And and it's a lovely channel. But I, you know, it's kind of why I like the discord server too, in the open studio, because I like people, you know, Luke often turn on the camera when he's making dinner, or some of the guys, you know, tofers there when he's repairing speakers. There's just something like you said, it's real. It's refreshing. It's it's honest. We don't have to play another game other than what we're doing directly. And and that's Yeah, in a, in a world where everything is every every in a world where you know, I've been I've been so I've got a huge box full of DVDs. And my wife is like, what are you going to do with this box? It's like, because I right now I got, you know, I'll like the houses, my kids are getting older, and the house isn't getting any bigger. So space is a real issue. And so okay, I got to rip all these DVDs. So I'm ripping these DVDs. And after reading the Matthew McConaughey video, or reading the Matthew McConaughey memoir, it's you get a sense of this. This, this image business and story business that is Hollywood. And on one hand, it's, it's artistry and it's art, it really is. And it's an important medium, and it's powerful. And all that is great. But people's lives aren't like that. People's lives are slow, and monotonous and boring sometimes. And we're repetitious. And yeah, so yeah, there's something to that about. I love, you know, I love watching. I love what's happened with the randos and Mary and Karen. These and Cassidy and there are others too, who have just sort of, they got their little YouTube channel, they got a few dozen or maybe a couple hundred subscribers. They're having conversations. They're they're working on stuff together. And a couple hundred people are watching them. They're contributing in the comment section. They're thinking together. They're sending emails. It's like, it's really cool. It's really cool. Yeah. Yeah, I've heard I have, you know, so much CS Lewis stuff knocking around my head. I don't remember where any of it comes from anymore. But one of his ideas that has always stuck with me was contrasting the sort of the blue collar laborer who likes to go and cheat drink cheap junk beer in the pub with his friends just because he likes it just because he wants to do it. It's a far happier, far healthier person than the hoity toity person who wants to go drink expensive wine and eat stinky cheese with their fancy friends because they think that's the cool thing to do. And that, you know, that's, it's just building the brand as opposed. So, you know, is, is what you're doing? Are you doing it simply because it's the good thing to do? Because it's it is profitable to you in some way, even if it's not necessarily profitable in terms of building your brand or making it. That's a good thing to do and keep on doing it. And it's been as I've, I continue sort of my, my journey of trying to make music. And the question comes up, do I want to do this just because I enjoy it? And maybe a handful of people listen, okay, this is okay. Because there is to some extent, a script if I wanted to try and build this into something of, you know, I could start making, making YouTube videos and start, you know, engaging in Instagram where musicians like and there's a way of doing this. And I get to think, is that really what I want? Or, you know, so this, uh, watch, watching other people do it fairly well has been, uh, has been helpful to me. So I was on Twitter yesterday and on the Twitter trending things, I was that little list, I'm always kind of amused at what makes that list. There was like billboard number one song in America. And, you know, you kind of know what pop music is when you're in college, but very quickly, I left the country. And, you know, so I haven't, I, I have, I have very vague ideas of the music my children listen to and know the names of etc. And so number one song. And so I thought, I should, you know, find it. What's the title of the song? I'll go to YouTube, I can listen to the song. And so I pull it up and there's a music video and it's a young attractive woman who was singing a love song about the, the boy that she loved who doesn't love her anymore. And so that, you know, obviously, that was sort of a tough, it's always what a lot of pop music is about. And I'm watching the video and I'm listening to her voice. And I'm just thinking, she just sounds like everyone else I've heard for the last five years. How could it be that all of these new stars sound just like the last star? And well, it's because there's a machine spitting them out and she's a new and you know, obviously beautiful voice and very talented and you know, it doesn't hurt if you're drop dead gorgeous and and and I mean, it's, it's an industry. And I thought, yeah, I'm not, I don't, I don't care to look into any more of her music at all. It's just uninteresting to me. Because if I want that, it's all out there. And so I'm much more interested in, in someone who is and every now and then one of them breaks through to someone who is just kind of out there doing their thing. And you know, that was, you know, I think about this sometimes. I mean, that was Jordan Peterson. I mean, he, he was doing his shtick long before any of us knew about him. And maybe, you know, it'll be interesting to see if he's got a second wave in him. Because maybe he's just thoroughly mapped territory for us. I don't know. But I, yeah, I God bless small channels. God bless. God bless people that are, you know, working out their stuff and saying, you know what, I'm really interested in this. And I think it's important. And I'm going to work on it. And if other people are interested, I want to, I need just at least a few interested people in it. But that's all I need. Because the beauty is in the project, not necessarily in the crowds. So yeah, very much so. All right, last point I came up and brainstorming on this is the church is a very big place, which is again, obvious. And yet, despite knowing that, I really didn't know that until these last couple years as I started to actually listen to what Catholics believe and listen to what Orthodox believe, listen to what high church Protestants believe. And it's like, oh, you people actually make a lot of sense. And well, I never grew up in a particularly exclusive sort of religious setting this, oh, the Catholics are definitely not saved. But still deep down inside, but still, I'm the one who's doing it right here. Otherwise, I wouldn't be going to this church, I'd be going to the church that was doing it right. And reading, you know, I haven't read a ton of Church Fathers, but read Confessions, which I've done a couple times. It's like, you know, this, this could be today, and yet it's still very alien in some ways. Reading. I'm reading the Fatal Discord book right now. Oh, yeah, that's good. Time to go. That's a really good book. It really is a good book. He's an amazing writer. It's like reading a super compelling drama novel, except it's all real, hopefully all real, hopefully he's not making stuff up. And seeing both how relatable people are, and yet still how, how alien some things can be. And so it's both it's been both very exciting, learning how much more there is out there and in ways being able to incorporate some of that into the way I think about my faith or do my faith. I the way that Alistair Roberts or Jonathan Fischel or some of those other guys think about the Bible symbolically, and they can, Alistair and another, another gentleman wrote a book on the symbolism of the Exodus throughout the Bible and how that moves throughout that. It clicks with my brain, these kind of following a symbolic thread through the Bible. So there's been great stuff like that. Another channel I watch, 10 minute Bible hour, which I will always promote to people. He has a series where he's been going around to different churches of different traditions and do an interview with the pastor, do a tour of the church, and probably three quarters of them you get done. It's like, I want to go to this church. I've never seen a dude so jazzed about being a Lutheran in my life. But this dude or he did like a three part series with a Coptic Orthodox Church and everything means something. It's like, this is so cool. So I've been extraordinarily blessed by learning about folks either either other people's channels or folks coming on your channel or whatever. And it that this sort of belongs here at the end, because I think it ties in to all the other points so far that if everything is a fight, how can I, you know, interact with a Catholic or even or whoever, because obviously, no, I'm gonna have to prove that I'm right and that you're wrong. If I'm going to have these bright lines, instead of letting, you know, our my Protestant water and their Catholic water sort of mixed together out in the estuary, and we can just, we just learn from each other. And it's, it's a very different world. Even my parents growing up, my mom grew up Catholic and my dad grew up Protestant. And it was, it was still kind of a thing when they got together back in the early 70s. There was, there was some disappointment and some conflict. And now, it's sort of like, you don't see quite so much of that. I'm sure there's still plenty of partisans out there. But there's a lot less of it. So I think to some extent, that is just the changes that the world is going through right now that is, is everything gets less Christian, obviously not less religious, shall we say, you know, you kind of got to stick together. Yeah, seems like so. Yeah. No, amen to that. Amen to that. And for me too. So, you know, like the point we were just talking about before, it's okay to be a little nerd in your little corner of Christianity and to, I mean, that nerddom has been big in the Christian Reformed Church. It was an enclave of Dutch immigrants. And, you know, very preoccupied with itself, you know, built our own institutions, minded our own business, just knew that we were the apple of God's eye and nobody else quite measured up. Which is just so funny when you think about it from other perspectives. And that, of course, has been diminishing through the second half of the 20th century to the point where, in some ways by 2021, the Christian Reformed Church doesn't even know itself anymore, doesn't quite, doesn't, or at least a lot in the church don't quite know where they fit. But yeah, the church is a very big place and the church has a very long history. And it isn't, it isn't, it isn't just chaos or meaningless. But it's, it's, it's astoundingly, yeah, the church is a very big place and the world is a very big place. And people are very deep pools themselves in many ways and communities. Yeah, it's, it's, I've learned so much listening to how many different people, you know, I've always, I mean, in some ways, my monologue videos are, are sort of a selfish pleasure in that this is what I'm thinking about. This is and the fact again, I'm still amazed that anybody would care to listen to it and would get something out of it. The, the, you know, talking with an author or someone that I've gotten to know a little bit is always easier because okay, I have a certain amount of, I know I have a certain expectation about how this conversation will go. And, you know, and it's not, it's not terribly scary. But the, but this practice that I started, which, you know, people would often say, you just, you let anybody sign up for a conversation, you have no idea. And so part of me is like, oh, come on, you know, I'm at the other end of a zoom call. We're not even live streaming this, what's the worst that could happen? But yeah, you know, every time I release, you know, people are often writing, there's no slots empty. No, there aren't, I release them when I look ahead and I say, okay, there's, there's time in my calendar, but every time before I release more slots, there's a tiny little part of me is like, do you really want to do this? Are you really just gonna open yourself up to the to the wide open seas and have anybody come in and because people are dangerous, you know, they are monkeys filled with snakes as Jordan Peterson called them. And, and so every time you open up for a randos conversation, even when they write a little description of what who they are and what they want to talk to, or maybe I've seen them in the discord server or something, you never quite know what you're gonna get. And so life is like a box of chocolates. And life is sometimes like a box that you open up and there might not be chocolates inside. So but at the same time, often at the end of my week when I'm thinking about Okay, what did I get done this week? What didn't I get done this week? I'm seldom I'm seldom I seldom regret having done the randos conversations. Because in many, many, many times it was a conversation I couldn't script. Yeah. And, and then suddenly I have a, a new realization and a vision of God's goodness and the breadth of his creation and the breadth of his church that, you know, here on this little mapped territory world that I live out of, but here's another voice from over here. And, oh, it's, it's, they've, they've had these things in their life, and they have these thoughts and ideas. And, okay. And let's, you know, and then to, you know, one of the joys of this channel is it has gotten sufficiently large that and now it has a tradition and a culture within it so that almost any randos conversation I put up 1000 people will watch. And, you know, a couple of dozen will comment on and they'll be, you know, maybe someone will come into the discord server or a meetup and connections will be built and somehow something will happen of substance for someone. And that's good thing. That's good thing. I'm happy to have had at least a hand in that. But it's but you very, you very quickly realize and again, being a pastor is good training for this, that when someone comes into the church, maybe they came in because they saw a sermon or know your denomination. And so, but in order for the church to actually live, they need to make relationships with other people in the church completely apart from me. And so to go into the discord server and watch friendships develop and watch the randos channel develop, because they're all I mean, that channel started because I said, Hey, I've had a conversation with a few dozen of you and you're wanting conversation three and four and five. And if I do that, Dale can't get a conversation. Yeah. And others can't get and I don't want to close that door. I'm not creating. I'm not creating a reservoir here. I want an estuary. And that means leaving the mouth open to the sea and letting trolls and sea monsters and shy fish and letting those folks and the goal isn't that they'll all have a relationship with me, but that they'll find relationships with one another. And they'll build those because that's that's actually what a church is. Yep. It's not everyone having a relationship with a celebrity pastor. It's people having relationships with each other and pastors come and go. Because people come and go. But there's at least enough of ecosystem happening there that you're all in relationship with one another. So when I go to the discord server, and I lurk in on text chats or voice chats, you know, they've all developed friendships, they know each other better than I know them. And that to me is deeply gratifying, because this is the knitting. This is the knitting of community and society where, you know, good things can be birthed. Yeah, that's, that's glorious. Yep. That's great. So yeah, that's just a little bit of thinking sort of why I'm still here. And it's, it's an interesting thing, because what I've learned through these last couple years of sort of listening in on this ecosystem is that I don't know nearly so much as, as maybe once I thought I did, and I am less sure about any of my theological positions than maybe I once was. And I am less willing or less able to engage in in sort of trying to push my own ideas, and what have you and less willing to want to build a brand, not that I was ever doing that, but I am less, less uncertain of the fact that I really want to keep doing this Jesus thing. And that is, it's very funny. Because I can, I can hear people's deconstruction stories and say, your arguments are not invalid. I see where you're coming from. See people get hurt, see, see all this stuff. And yet, I to go back in my word and engage in a little self promotion and quote my own songwriting here, he's done a work in my heart that I cannot undo. And it's like, I, this, this was never a conscious decision that I made. And nobody talked me into it. And all of these delightful people that I have gotten to listen in on their, all of their, their thoughts and ideas have destabilized me in some ways. And yet in that, in that shaking and in that destabilization, I can find that it was never really me to begin with. And all of my, my thoughts and presuppositions were not really what were holding me up to begin with. And it gives a certain degree of confidence because there's, I can get why people might from time to time, give you a hard time of why you're not trying to get people saved. Why are you not giving people the hard sell? And it's like, maybe you could, but then somebody smarter than you, or making better arguments, you can just come and talk them right back out. And so I know, I think you just, you just got to speak the truth as you see it, or whatever trite cliche you want to say. And I got to it because I, I can't, I can't even for myself. It's just, it's just there. And I don't quite know why, but I'm glad it is. And yeah, so that's why I'm still here. Wow. I'm here for a lot of the same reasons. Because, you know, so one of the things lately that I've, you know, heard in a number of places is, and I think it's true. I mean, we, we outsource our cognition. And we're talking about this at my family and my family when we're all getting together for the holidays that certain members of the family have certain skills and certain knowledge, so that I don't have to take up my few resources to hold those skills and hold those not hold that knowledge. And so in the family system, I hold some of that. That's why the death, a death in the family is so hard, because a certain amount of skill and knowledge goes away from the family system. And this is why human beings and community are so are so powerful. But you're exactly right in that what what a church affords is a lot of that distributed cognition, and also describe, you know, this is why there's a diversity of gifts. And I can't play music very well. I'm not particularly gifted in leading worship, but there are others who are and other and so what we do in a body is we, we store ice, I offload my knowledge and my skills into other people, but when we're together, we have access to this far richer thing. And so I, I cannot, you know, again, theologically, I don't make Christians. That's the job of the Holy Spirit. Well, now, again, people thinking in rather limited fashions will say, well, that's what the Holy Spirit is this thing. The thing isn't really the right word. Because a person who is struggling with all kinds of all kinds of doctrine or all kinds of stuff can can be a member of a community of a church and in a sense, offload aspects of their knowledge to other people. And you see this in churches all the time. People who are not who are unfamiliar with church, go into a church and imagine that everybody in this church believes kind of the same thing in lockstep. And now there are certainly commonalities within the church. But once you start asking questions, you begin to recognize that, well, it's a mess out there what people believe. And they've been colonized by Hollywood angels and trinkets from Christian bookstores and New Age ideas and nationalism and all across the board. It's all in there. But in the context of the ecosystem, you know, if the ecosystem is healthy, there's enough balance and so that a little too much nationalism in you but as a community, there's things we will and we won't do. And that that then that then helps the people borrow a health from others that they might not have developed for themselves. And so there's greater wisdom in the group than there can be in an individual, there's more giftedness in the group than there can be in an individual. And, and in that ways, the entire group is stronger than any single individual, the individual could possibly be. And this is, you know, in our, you know, we might see little fractals of this, like in an ant colony, where you've got worker ants and drones and the queen, and you got all those things. And so together, they, they do more than any individual ant could do. But in human beings, this scales up so much more richly. And so, you know, as a pastor, you very quickly learn that it is the it is the culture of the ecosystem, that is the church, which is really what you're stewarding. And all of this little individual control of people, you're gonna have to give up that game very quickly. It's every now and then something happens, you have to target and say, that is not what we're going to do. Okay, we are not during the worship service, you are not going to go around plastering bumper stickers of your favorite political candidate on all the cars in the church and people that I will not let you do. Okay. Nor are we going to hand out voting guides of either particular, we're not going to play that game. We are going to be doing these things here and not those things there. And for the most part, after a little while, as you know, and I've been amazed to see that happen in the discord server, the culture takes on a life of its own. And people sort of have an instinctive understanding, they couldn't list it all if they tried have instinctive understanding is that this is what we do. That's not really a game we play. So then when someone comes in there and starts trying to play the other game, there's sort of this reaction like in the movie inception when they have that they're walking through a dream and everybody's kind of looking at this, okay, you don't be long. And and of course, people like, Oh, what a what an exclusive community? Yeah, but you're not gonna get away with that. That's, that's, that's what happens in our body with antibodies, you know, you don't belong. And and so then if actually the organism is healthy and life giving not only for those inside, but those outside, that's what the church is to be so now I love your list, your list is your list is is dead on and so the church is a very big place and you know what God what God is doing is always bigger still. And it's it's, it's great fun to watch. Yes, it is. So I like I like this whole conversation. This is good. You you are going to let me share this, right? I didn't Oh, yes, of course. Oh, question about that. But I wanted to be sure because no, because this is really helpful for me. When I have my moments of what am I doing? What am I doing? What's this? Is this really how I want to spend my time? My energy? Yeah, yeah, it is. I definitely wanted to, to try and do something that, you know, continues to this ongoing conversation. I've been very blessed by, by what has grown out of out of this broader movement than I very much want to, hopefully, hopefully give back a little of that. So yeah, definitely. I was hoping to. So have you been on a randos conversation yet? I have not no Oh, you should, you should. Well, like a whole bunch of a whole bunch of bridges are doing Exodus 90 things. So we kind of have to wait till probably April until we can have access to them. But you should definitely contact Jeff and, you know, maybe do a CS Lewis conversation or something like that. But yeah, yeah, I'd love to. I'd love to. I don't get a chance to watch all of the content. Obviously, there's just way too much. I know. But I love. I love what the I love what what everyone, you know, everyone else is doing. And it's I think it's, you know, it's fun going to going to one of these other channels, and seeing commenters who I you know, they've been over in my, they'd make more comments in my video a year or two ago. And now they're making all these comments on some of the other videos. And I just love that because the ecosystems need to nest. And that's where you really get the fertilization. And that's where that's where the whole organism grows and becomes strong and durable and anti fragile. And it's it's it's thrilling to watch. Definitely. Yeah. That's been cool. Well, any any other things you wanted to get in here, Dale? This was really good. Ah, I would I would say maybe a closing question. So I, my whole goal with it was with this was to say that, you know, I've seen things on this channel and other channels that seem to maybe portend a viable method of Christian engagement in a post Christian world of, you know, for so long, Christians were had this sort of dominant place in the culture. And, and there was a Christian ease was more broadly spoken. And we were just able to do these Christian things and evangelize in different ways and engage with the culture in different ways. And that seems to be changing. What I've seen here and elsewhere is that that is some success in with people changing that. So I was going to ask if you know, you've been doing this now for three years, is there anything that stands out for you as this definitely works? This might be a good bit of advice or, you know, maybe some things that you've found that have definitely not worked for trying to engage with people in this new world. I think I think you laid a lot of it out here. Well, playing the it's it's my way or the highway game does definitely not work well. But you also do need to have a sense of yourself. I mean, people do get frustrated when I have conversations with people who are not Christians or have various heretical beliefs or something like that. Why isn't the pastor calling them out on this? I don't know. Ask yourself that question. Why isn't the pastor calling themself up? Does the pastor not understand? You know, confessional lines outside the Council of Nicaea? Well, not adequately, perhaps, or perhaps not completely. But no, the pastor, the pastor understands a lot of this stuff. Why isn't the pastor challenging this person on this point? Well, again, all of your, you know, not everything has to be a fight. Not everything has to be a fight. And I, I think fundamentally, fights are, I think, important for communities. But they're not directly formative for individuals, the ways we like to imagine they are. I mean, we and we all know this, very seldom do we have the atheist conversation with the Christian. And at the end of it, one of them says, Oh, that's it. Okay, I'm an atheist now. Or, oh, I'm a Christian now. It never happens. Well, why doesn't it happen? Well, I think we all know why it doesn't happen. Because people don't change with the lights on like that. And so it's more interesting to me watching the, you know, I've been watching rationality rules a bit, and watching how over the last three years, his thinking has evolved. And to stand up and turn on the lights, say, Ah, gotcha. And I do that sometimes. But it's, um, no, we should all be evolving. I mean, that's part of the realization that we're small. So yeah, let's evolve. And, and I've had to, you know, I remember making some rather, making some comments about Roman Catholic transubstantiation, or at least my understanding of it. And some of the very smart Roman Catholic watchers of this channel basically waited and said, Um, I don't think you're representing our view correctly. And so go watch Bishop Aaron and I watched his videos like, Oh, that's what you believe? Oh, I'm gonna have to rethink this war that we've been fighting for how many years and are, you know, straw manning you doesn't necessarily improve my knowledge of you. And of course, that leads to, you know, Brett Sockold, my conversation with him, and on and on and on and on. And so there've been ways that I have changed over these last three years. And, and, and some might look at that and say, you know, Paul corrupted himself by having a YouTube channel. I'm sure there are people out there that believe that. Okay, but I'm me and they're not me. So, okay, maybe you don't want to start a YouTube channel. That's fine. But I'm I don't have a lot of regrets over what I've learned. And and I think as you said very well, you know, I think you said it very well. I took notes when you said it. I don't I don't know as much as I thought I did. Unless you're about some things than I was. Unless you're about pushing my own ideas. I'm less willing to build a brand. But I'm less certain. I'm less uncertain that I really want to keep doing this Jesus thing. And I think that's very, very well said. And I feel very much the same way. And I am, I am more certain of a number of points of doctrine that are really crucial to Christianity than I was even three years ago. I mean, the to me the, the physicality of the resurrection of Jesus Christ is even more important than I understood it to be three years ago, three years ago, I might have said something like, well, you know, it's just it just has different it just fits into my picture of the world in a different way. And so on the whole, I see the changes that I've made over these last three years as upgrades. And some might for one reason or not, or another, and I know that in some corners, think that this has been corruption rather than improvement. But we're all responsible for what, you know, for our actions and what we're thinking. So this is this is the this is what we do when we live. Indeed. Cool. That's all all the talking points I had so unless there is any other follow ups you have. Well, I think I think this will be quite well received. And I think the comments will be good. And I look forward to I look reading and hearing the interaction in it. And the various places that that we're doing stuff. So thank you, Dale. Glad you found a random slot. Yeah, I know. I was happy to get it. So yeah, thanks a lot. Keep doing what you're doing. Take care. You too. Yep. Bye.