https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=PmmWGal1fuY

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon, a little early this week. Last week was Transfiguration Sunday where we looked at the transfiguration of Jesus and we're marking the transition from Epiphany to Lent. And we talked about the description of God given by Martin Luther, God who is nothing is so small but God is still smaller, nothing is so large but God is still larger, nothing is so short but God is still shorter, nothing so long but God is still longer. He is supernatural, inscrutable being, not a being but being who exists at the same time in every little seed, whole and entire and yet in all, above all, outside all created things. But this is the vision of God and Jesus reveals himself to be God. But now how do we interpret this? When I saw this painting of Jesus in the transfiguration I immediately thought of this pose that Neo makes, I don't remember if it's the first or the second Matrix movie, but almost right there. And in many ways this is sort of, well obviously in the Matrix movies Neo is portrayed as sort of a Christ figure and these are the terms in which we sort of normally think about Jesus. Now what is a God or a son of God? Just recently there was a video on Twitter that came up of this man for the last three years in India who has been worshipping Donald Trump as a God. Now of course this makes great political hay in the United States. Somebody made a comment that, oh I thought this was the Republican National Convention but you know I haven't received the invitation yet for Trump's meeting. I don't know who to contact and the procedure to get the invitation. I don't think he'll get invited. I was very hopeful I would receive the invitation from my God. I don't know where my God knows, I don't know whether my God knows that a devotee exists in India. A devotee has been worshipping him for three years. I was worshipping him for the last four years. I prayed to him every day. I hope one day he will bless me and fulfill my wish. Another woman has commentary on his series. His parents have gone to their native place after seeing him back to their home country or their home place doing puja every day for the Trump statue. First he was praying to a small photo then he installed the statue and has been doing a milk bath and turmeric bath every day and fasting every Friday for Trump. His parents told him not to do this so many times but he's not listened to anyone and continues his prayers every day. Now again we think this is just crazy but what we've lost is an understanding of how much of the world sees the world and sees power and understands religious ritual, emulation, imitation. Trump is a God because he has all of this money and he has these beautiful consorts or wives and he succeeded in getting elected to the President of the United States and has enormous power. This is a God and what it means to be a son of God, this guy is aspiring to be a son of God and he's hoping that his God will pay attention to him and bless him and give him blessings and that this can change this man's life. Now the fastest growing religious movement in the first century was, at least according to Tom Holland, the cult of the Emperor, Augustus Caesar and that just sounds crazy to us but it's not much different than this man's God. This is the same thing going on. This is a God or a son of a God, Julius Caesar after he dies is divinized. Augustus Caesar after he dies is divinized and so pray to the gods and hope that some of their power might come down to you. Now again in a secular realm this just sort of seems crazy but of course this is a very different perspective from the Jewish perspective but we should hear it when we're listening to the temptations of Jesus. When Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil after fasting 40 days and 40 nights he was hungry. The tempter came to him and said, if you are the son of God tell these stones to become bread. Use your divine power to relieve and meet your needs. It's not very different from these two Japanese women, these millennials that have been in my sermon for the last four weeks. I do end up praying for help when I'm in a bind so I think it's okay for God to exist and it's something important. This is moralistic therapeutic deism that's re-essurging and it's very similar to the perspective of this one Indian man who is worshipping Trump as a God. Come on Jesus, show your power, use it. I won't tell anyone, use it just to relieve this. If you are the son of God, this is what sons of God's do. Jesus answered, it is written, man shall not live by bread alone but in every word that comes from the mouth of God. So sort of this second image of God that Jesus will rely on the word of God even as he's hungry, not by bread alone. And the devil took him to a holy city and had him stand on the highest point of the temple. If you are the son of God, he said, throw yourself down for it is written, he will command his angels concerning you and they will lift you up on their hands so that you will not strike your foot against a stone. Use your divine power to publicly demonstrate relationship with the universe or God, your great power to heal and to show yourself. And if you show yourself to be such of God, then people will listen to you and follow you and obey you and do what you say in order that the divine blessing may flow through you to them. Again we see this all over the place. You'll see this even in some ministries that associate themselves with Christianity. Jesus won't do it. Did I miss a verse? Yep, I missed verse seven. Oops. That's why we do a rough draft. Jesus answered him, it is written, do not put the Lord your God to the test. Testing in that way is sort of an expression of disbelief. Then the devil took him to a very high mountain, disbelief and manipulation, to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world in their splendor. All this I will give you, he said, if you bow down and worship me. Interesting that the son of God quote doesn't come back in. Afford me legitimacy and I will give you the sword to govern. Jesus said to him, away from me Satan, for it is written, worship the Lord your God and serve him only. Then the devil left him and angels came and attended him. Why doesn't Jesus use his power to get the job done? This is something that Christians, skeptics think about a lot. Skeptics will claim well because he doesn't have any, because he's a made-up God, because it's not real, because it's just a fantasy. That same interesting thing gets spoken about when Jesus is on the cross. He saved others. He cannot save himself. He will not save himself. They don't ask why not. In a modern context Christians are mocked for waiting on the Lord. Well, what does that mean? It means sitting around and suffering. If you are the son of God, wash my hands and I'll wash yours. The needs are real. I mean, I don't want to diminish this. We get in binds. People are sick and desperate. I'm a pastor of a church. We pray all the time. Does everyone we pray for, are they all healed? We want justice. Shouldn't there be justice in the world? Our hearts cry out, make stones into bread so there are no more pangs of hunger. I will lay the rightness of my religious allegiance so my religious rivals may be driven to their knees while I self-righteously gloat. Seize the power of the state so justice can come by the sword. If Jesus wins us with bread, if Jesus wins us with religious loyalty favor, if Jesus wins us with political promises, what is the one thing he hasn't won? He really hasn't won us. I began this talking about the two conceptions of the universe and those familiar with my YouTube videos know about this. There's an Old Testament scholar at Yale, Christine Hayes, turned me on to a book, The Religion of Israel, where this Jewish scholar notes that the Old Testament is very strange because we don't find sort of this gradual turn from paganism, evolution into monotheism, there seems to be a dramatically different assertion. And the implicit communal overall assertion is that the universe just basically is and that within this universe there are beings with power who vie with one another to get what they want. And the gods are beings of power and they're revealed by their success and that's why you would worship Donald Trump as a god. That's the universe of the meta-divine realm. It's an impersonal system. But Ezekiel Kaufman says that God is the ground of all being. He's a person and he's an agent. He's the god that Luther wrote about. The heart of natural fallen religion, our wants, our desires, our needs, our agendas remain at the center. The gods are tools and mutual users that we negotiate with. The gods are using each other. They're using Greek mythology. We don't love the god or the gods. We use the gods and each other to get what we want and what we need. If Jesus bows to temptation, this is the world we are back into and stuck into. But Jesus won't go there. He will suffer. He will be hungry. He will suffer the religious division that in fact will do him in. He will fall under the sword of the state. That will brutally kill him. I dipped onto Eric Weinstein's Discord server and he was having a conversation and he said, he articulated something that I have heard from so many because what I hear is, I cannot believe in God because of the chaos of the universe and I don't want to believe in a god. I've always struggled to try to articulate why that is and he put it in exactly the right way. It's better if there is no god because if there is no god, if there is a god, you have to worry about what's on his mind. The only experience we have is that people are the problem. This is why we like money because money gives options. This is why we like institutions. This is why we like people bound by professional office in order to dispose and act in a predictable way. And we don't want personhood. It's better if there is no god because if there is a god, you don't have to worry about what's on his mind and we're worried. When bad things happen, when our prayers go unanswered, we're worried. And we wonder, can I get more power? Can I find a pastor with more power? Can I find the right religion with the angle? Can I bounce one god off another? Can I one way, can I use science? Can somehow, can I depersonalize the universe so we can get what we want into a reliable technological system? What if God does have consciousness? What if he hears our prayers? What if God is personal? How might we know we can trust him? What if this god would sacrifice his well-being for ours? Even if we didn't quite know what we truly want or need? Could you trust in such a god? Isn't that the Christian story? Well, okay, if you believe in such a god, then you do likewise. He offers you his body and his blood and you offer yours to this untrusting, untrustworthy world.