https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=65CcfvXXHug

 Hi, this is Paul and it's a great pleasure to have John Verbeke on the channel again. John, thanks again for being generous with your time. You've been doing tons of interviews lately and I really enjoy your content. It's sort of like Easter eggs when someone sends me another one of your videos on some small podcast somewhere and I get to enjoy it. Thanks Paul. I had such a good time. It was such a great pleasure talking to you last time. I'm really looking forward to our conversation today. Yeah, I've been very busy. There's been lots of people who have been wanting to talk to me and some of these conversations have been some of the best I've had in my life and some of them had a profound effect on me. So, this has been generally very good for me overall as a person. It's getting me sort of more comfortable and my partner, she was sort of saying, John, try to relax and enjoy it. Well, I'll have to say that I've been a pastor of a small church and when I say small, I mean most Sundays there are 50 or so people gathered here and then to have started a YouTube channel and to have lots and lots of conversation partners. Now that I've been in this about a year and a half going on two years, on one hand it's fun but it does require adjustments and also limitations. You have to put boundaries on some of these things because the internet is a very big place. Yeah, you can get drawn in. Although, I do like the corner that you and I and Jonathan and Savella and some of the people in Rebel Wisdom were carving out this really interesting place and I think that's very valuable. I really like that a lot. I completely agree. You should have seen the look. So Rebel Wisdom very early on came and visited me here at Living Stones and when these two guys from the UK were setting up their cameras and the people at my church are like, what is going on? They still don't quite, most of my congregation is quite, I wouldn't call them elderly but they're in their 70s and 80s and so they're not on the internet. And so you do this stuff but it's been interesting. So you put out your Awakening from the Meaning Crisis episode every week that I look forward to and I've been following along with that. As we talked about in our last conversation, I very much enjoyed those other two conversations you did with Christopher. Yeah, Chris is fantastic. And so he and I are connecting now and we are going to have some conversations and I agree with you 100% this little, it's not just the topics that we're getting into but I very much appreciate the culture of these conversations. Yes, exactly. You know I was talking when I was, I was mentioning this before we started recording, I had this excellent discussion with Guy Sensok, the inventor of Circling and in there I mentioned how when I'm talking to somebody like yourself and I said, you know, here's the thing. I know that Paul and I disagree about some stuff but I trust Paul way more than a lot of people who I share propositions with because I understand that he's coming, he's putting himself at risk, there's vulnerability in this and I respond in kind and that engenders much more trust in me than just simply sharing propositions. And so that, I think that's part of what I'm seeing in this community. There's like, we're going to really make sure that we can talk about stuff even that we disagree about in a way that really respects this trust we're building, really respects mutual respect. And so yeah, I agree with that. I think that's definitely the manner of this community I think is as important as the matter of this community. Absolutely, absolutely. And it's been interesting for me and I knew this would come given my years of experience within the Christian church and the Christian community. I often get more heat from fellow Christians and it's that tribal dynamic and you know the thing about tribes is that you need them, but they have to have their place. And so figuring out how to navigate that in conversations, I did a conversation with, you know, ironically probably the riskiest conversation I have is not with non-Christian but it's with a guy who was raised in a non-trinitarian, what they call a biblical unitarian church. Because then when you're talking to heretics, oh the dynamics are so hot. Right, I can imagine. But that was a good thing for you to have done though. It was a good thing for you to have done. Well having given that disclaimer, we're about to sort of do something that we said we weren't but before we do this, I did want to give my own disclaimer about some of my own views about Christian apologetics and about the kind of debating that we see often on YouTube. Often it's, Jordan Peterson calls them celebrity atheists. So there are celebrity atheists and then there are celebrity apologists and they go at each other with, you know, in a certain style, in a certain format. But also I think, and your course on Awakening from the Meaning Crisis has been so helpful for me in terms of giving me language to understand, you know, participatory knowing and all of this stuff. I'm glad to hear that. And so I, you know, this actually, actually there's a picture of my daughter's cat which is living with us now, which woke me up at 2.30 in the morning. And then I was thinking about this conversation and I sort of pieced this whole argument together and it was kind of a pulling together of a bunch of the stuff I've been working on. And so I thought- I can see that. I can see that. Yeah. And so I thought I'd like to just run through it with you. And as you said, I mean, I trust you. And so I, you know, a good friend offers critique because that sharpens me. The Bible actually has a verse that talks about iron sharpening iron. Sure. And critique means not only criticizing, it also means pointing out what's helpful, what's useful, what's insightful. And you know, good conversation also means that you're really setting yourself to learn from the other person. I think I just- I'm glad that you're sticking with the course. I just wanted to mention that. The videos, the last few videos have been some of the hardest. They're very formal, very sort of not in bold scientific. What I can say to you and other viewers is it's going to turn back towards the spiritual phenomenological topics very shortly. So just hang in there. It's coming around. It's coming around. Actually, a lot of these most recent ones have been my favorites. Oh, really? Wow. Because the relevance realization stuff is really hard for people. I mean, and I've been really, I've been really careful to respond to some of my viewers are saying, wow, that was really hard or that was over my head. And I'm sort of, you know, keep going. You know, when you see what its implications and what follows from it, then you'll be able to understand why I'm spending so much time on it. Well, and I, you know, for me, too, the relevance realization and the connection with with with Darwin. Yeah, that just that was mind blowing and fascinating. And maybe I need to digest a lot of this stuff. It takes me a while to digest stuff. People don't understand. I'm on YouTube. I don't have a Ph.D. I'm not an academic. I'm not a theologian. I'm a pastor. And what that means is I'm sort of a jack of all trades. And so I'm always trying to assemble things in in larger comprehensive things and to also try to use because part of my job is that I'm always having to talk to people that have a huge span in terms of. Backgrounds, cognitive ability, all of these measures, cultures. So, I mean, that's that's sort of what pastors do. People don't always quite understand what pastors do, but that's that's what I am. It's what I do. It's a challenging job. Yeah. So while teachers have the same thing, you have a you have a little bit of selection process in terms of university, but you have a variety of cultures and especially for me because I teach in cognitive science, which is interdisciplinary. So I have people from many different academic backgrounds coming together and I have to try and present material in a way that bridges between all of those different groups. So I have some sense of what you're talking about. I don't think it's as difficult as what you face, but I have something analogous to that. Yeah. Anyways, we should get started on your thing. Let's let's dive in. And and in all fairness, I'm going to what I'm calling this present an argument, which arguments are just arguments for the reality. I'm using that not the existence of God, the reality of God with respect to the treatment of persons. And we're going to do another video after this where where John can come back with some other more non theistic ideas, which I'm very much looking forward to. Yes, thank you. I like I'm looking forward to both of these conversations and and how they're going to resonate with each other. So and so this is basically my introductory slide. And those of you who watch my channel regularly, this is sort of my format. Actually do my sermons in a similar format. So an argument for the reality of God based on the right treatment of persons. And this is within some work towards an understanding of this term person and understanding of this word real, which is which is really difficult. Nice. Understanding of nature that that both deals respectfully with kind of an ancient perspective and a modern perspective. Right. Right. And an understanding of this word God. Now, if there's a if there's a fudgier word than boy, I say things and I think I'm going to get in so much trouble saying this, but it's the truth. I mean, the word God is so, so difficult. Yes. And when I watch these debates on the Internet and actually when I watch it play out in the Christian church or the conversations with people between believers and unbelievers or Christians and non-Christians or theists and atheists, I just think we're using this word in ways that we're just treating it far too lightly than we ought. I agree. And I think the way you're formulating this is a good way to start not treating it as a standalone term, but seeing as it bound up with these other three contentious terms. So and I think one thing I agree with right off the bat is that they should be treated as a network together and they're they're all problematic, but they're not independently problematic. They're problematic in ways that intersect and influence each other. So I agree right away with that, that that should be how we're formulating the problem. I disagree. And I think you are saying that to with people who simply, you know, OK, we're going to have a debate on the existence of God. And then they just start running with sort of intuitive or commonsensical or, you know, sort of folk psychological notions of these terms. I find all of that deeply, deeply problematic. So I like the way you set up the arena we're going to plan. I think I want to stick to that, you know, trying to keep these four things talking to each other in a deep way. I think it's very important. Cool. And and probably because John and I are figuring this conversation out as we go along too. So maybe I'll present the slide and then John will give some critique and we'll sort of walk our way through that way. Yeah. And I want to do it that way, as I was saying to Paul earlier, precisely because I don't want to treat this as an abstract argument that we're just going to look at its premises and its conclusion in some sort of purely logical manner. I want to set it back into very much like a platonic practice into a dialogue. And right. And so that we can talk to each other step by step as it's going along. So I'm trying to model how I think we should be doing this. I take it that's what you're doing too Paul. As am I. As am I. So I'm going to move my camera a little bit because I'll be working from the middle. And with thanks to people that I have learned from that have helped me put this together. It's really a work over the last year and a half or so passed Pascal a little bit. C.S. Lewis, Jordan Peterson, John Verbeke, Jonathan Peugeot. All all five of these individuals have contributed greatly to this. Now we're going to see if this works. OK. This works a little different. Here we go. OK. So a little little bit from Pascal and those of you who who saw a recent video know that I I picked up a little bit of Pascal from an introduction. And this actually was prompted by John's mention of Pascal. And I've listened to those a couple of times. It's a John has a very long project. There's so much to cover. He can often only just touch on things which to me gives little teasers for me to dig in and research more. So Pascal is going to be in this this the series I'm working on that's going to follow the awakening from the meaning places the after Socrates. So I want to unpack Pascal quite a bit more. So that's going to be an opportunity for me to do so. Yeah I think Pascal is important for like as you know a contemporary and early responder to the Cartesian framework by somebody who was as important in some ways. I mean so that's wrong. He was quite important not as important as what I want to say he is as he's as gifted mathematically as they could. That's clearly the case. Yes yes. So so one of the little tidbits I picked up and when I heard this it was like it's just like something clicked in my head where Pascal had this idea that we have these two modes I'm going to call them two modes of mind. And one is the spirit of geometry which is sort of this you know rational way of approaching the world and a spirit of finesse which is a more exploratory participatory way of exploring the world. And these are these are two modes of regard and two modes of approach. Yep. And to also two modes of assuming an identity. This is also part of the existential. So many people view Pascal as an early example or at least a proto existentialist because I would say that these are not even not just modes of mind. I think these are these are existential modes. These are different ways of being in the world. And that's something that is important to Pascal's whole argument in the Ponce because it's it's a way of you know talking about not just a way because Pascal is all about how you commit yourself to a particular way of being ultimately. And so I just want to make that link because I think that's important. Oh that's and that's super helpful for me because that that is very much how I see it rolling out. Yeah very much. In my argument as I go and I noted and John corrected me in the comments section I'm dyslexic so I always have issues with writing. This graphic and I'll often write on the whiteboard some write and I'll write I'll misspell something and not realize it's misspelled. And all I get from it is this weird signal something's wrong. So go ahead go ahead. So so and just for the argument sake and again I am a novice at all of this and so but when we when I listen to these conversations about both hemispheres of the mind there's you know it's perhaps that that half of the brain is is sort of committed to let's say the spirit of geometry of mapped territory and the right brain to the spirit of finesse and unmapped territory. There seems these I mean these two poles seem to be points of convergence. They come up regularly. Yeah. So I would comment on that. One thing you should know is David Fuller at Rebel Wisdom is trying to put together a dialogue between me and the Gilchrist. Oh wonderful. Yeah. So one way I would try and deepen that again this is critique not just criticism is I tend to think of so I do a bit of work on that on the left on the two hemispheres. There's a couple of things you need to know. Left and right are sort of helpful ways of talking. You have to understand that it's not necessarily this. Don't think of it as essentially left and essentially right. There are people for example who have hemisperectomies early on in life and you'll find both of these functions in the remaining hemisphere. So that's an important we're talking more functionally here. It happens that it's often anatomically located but it's not dependent on that. And because and that's important because I think it's ultimately a functional difference. And this is what I would say. This is what I argue elsewhere. I think the left hemisphere deals with familiar situations that are well defined problems for us whereas I think the right hemisphere deals with much more unfamiliar situations that tend to be more ill defined for us. And soon as you think about it that way you can think about the kinds of you face these two broad types of problems throughout all of your existence. Well defined problems and ill defined problems. And that's why you're going to see two fundamentally different strategies. What we should also remember though and is that the two hemispheres are mostly always working in an opponent processing fashion not an adversarial. Don't mishear me right. They're they're working they work in a sort of corrective checks and balance back and forth between to between each other. So I just wanted to sort of deepen the cognitive science get a little bit more about I think how we can understand what the hemispheres are doing. I think that's very helpful. And your treatment in awakening from the meaning crisis on problems. I found that section so so helpful. Again for me that course has just been just lights coming on for me. You know I'm 56 years old. I've lived a little bit of life and some time now there are words for things that I've always sort of known it just you know we waste college on the young. So I mean it's thank you for saying that. I mean part of what. And this is why again I want to do a dialogue and not just you know a theoretical criticism which which were in dialogue. We can together. We can together make new vocabulary together craft a better theoretical grammar. That's what's important. OK. Those of you who've been following my channel for a long time know that I've CS Lewis's book miracles has been a favorite of mine for years. I as a it sounds weird but as a sort of spiritual discipline as a pastor living in a very secular society I found I really wanted to read this book a couple of times a year. And just because Lewis would sort of had kind of a shamanistic effect on me sort of jarring me out of some easy assumptions I would make that that actually now with this vocabulary of a meaning crisis that I think I would find myself getting frustrated depressed and I would read Lou I would read this book and it would sort of it was sort of shake me up a little bit. I don't know John if you've ever read this book. No I mean I've read some Lewis I've of course read like everybody else all the Nornet Chronicles and my favorite passage in there is I don't know what they teach children these days it's all in play though. But so I know that I've read till we have faces a long time ago I read the screw tape letters but I haven't I'm really interested in reading a book that you've recommended The Discarded Image that look I want to get that book that looks very good. I haven't read Miracles so I'm saying right now I'm ignorant of the book I'm trusting you to present the argument on his behalf. Yeah I won't present his whole argument but the Discarded Image is the last book he wrote and I had never read it. I inherited a bunch of Lewis books from my father and my grandfather. That book wasn't in it. And so then I picked it up at one point and I just read it and the timing of it was absolutely perfect in terms of this conversation and figuring out the meaning crisis because I think actually Lewis and Barfield and Tolkien were very much in the wake of World War One dealing with the same thing. Yeah very much very much. I think World War One is one of those watershed events in which the meaning crisis comes before World War Two to some extent too especially because of the atrocities right because you can see the existentialist responding to that. Go ahead please. OK so he makes he makes this argument early in the book that naturalism and I'm going to tweak his arguments a little bit. Lewis is a fervent Platonist. I mean he really is. Yeah and I appreciate that. I appreciate that. But he makes this argument that if naturalism and this is the kind of naturalism that he he he grew up in the Church of England in Belfast and then as a young teenager he gave up his faith with the death of his mother and became an atheist was educated by the great Nock who was a tutor of his who was very much a rationalist. You know I would say a far more vigorous rationalist than even many of the celebrity atheists that are around today. Very sharp very consistent very locked down. Well Lewis then you know later on he had a conversion and he's thinking about naturalism he says in many ways the division of the universe of naturalism is what the universe is is is that the whole show meaning everything we know about everything we can know about is in a sense one gigantic chain of cause and effect. Now he will he will not hold anyone to actually be able to demonstrate this because no one could. But that's in a sense the the posture of naturalism towards the world that in a sense is its presupposition. And and then that now I'm taking Lewis from miracles and getting into a little bit of discarded image. Right. And very much into your course. And I again I really appreciate the animations channel that takes some of your stuff and and makes it into some little videos. Zeke's work. Yeah. It's his those videos need to see have more viewers. Yes they do. They really do. Really really great work. Yeah. And I found it. I mean for those who are struggling with your long. Their class. That's that's great notes to totally totally people see it visually. Well no and I think every one of the videos he did I thanked him for it. I thought it was perfect perspicacious. That was excellent. Yeah. Yeah. So so and I think in those videos it shows quite nicely. And I think in your in your treatment of philosophy when we get to Copernicus and Galileo human beings become alone in the universe. Very much. I agree with that. And and so and that's very foundational to the meaning crisis whereas we are presupposition is that everything else is is one gigantic chain of cause and effect. I'm here we alone in a sense have autonomy and agency and and will in this world. And so and then we have this this terrifying suspicion. Maybe we're just deluded to thinking we are the exception. And then suddenly we're in you know I liken it to sort of being a victim of Lou Gehrig's disease where you're trapped within your body. You know you can't help it but you're also deluded in your mind in terms of thinking that you have agency. And and then Lewis makes the final point that that's in a sense the setup of naturalism at least the naturalism he was dealing with at the beginning of the 20th century. Yes. And and he said but we don't act like that's true. And he uses a variety of people who you know who stand up and he says these these people who are naturalists at the moment of crisis they stand up and they they speak like you know they speak like people even though their worldview says they're just part of the whole show running through this script. No. So if we could pause here because I have a couple of comments on this. So first of all I think that the way you've linked what Lewis is saying to the problem I'm posing in the in the series I think that's right. There's a sense in which we have this worldview in which we don't belong insofar as we are meaning makers that act on purpose and have you know have sort of qualitative experience of that meaning making and acting on purpose. I agree with all of that. What I would what I what I would respond I guess is a bit of a challenge is the adequacy of of Lewis's representation of naturalism. And since nature is one of the things we are going to be trying to unpack many many people I would include myself in this see naturalism as including a lot more entities than sort of cause and effect or just material objects. So structural functional organization information I mean even in with physics in order to deal with the black hole paradox they're really seriously considering information in the technical sense at least as being you know something that is fundamentally real. And so patterns are real all kinds of relations are real and many many naturalists are where called non reductive naturalists. We don't believe that all of these entities that we consider real can be theoretically reduced to sort of you know quantum states or things like that. So many people again myself included resist the idea that naturalism should be wedded inextricably to a reductionism. So some of the conversations I had with Jean Pierre on this about trying to bridge between a naturalism that sees something like a deep continuity between the levels and his his panpsychism might be a place where you could see that conversation taking place in more depth. So I just wanted to step and say I think Lewis is right in one sense and it's an important sense this is not to be dismissive or a left hand compliment or sorry that's insulting to left handed people but that's the place. Right. Right. That that worldview is the pervasive worldview and it is a worldview that I think in which we do not find a place at home and that worldview is one that is advocated for and defended by many people explicitly on the Internet. Now perhaps where you and I are differing although I'm not sure what to what degree the difference is is I think the home of the tent of naturalism is much bigger than that and it includes a lot more variation and a lot more options. And of course that's what I try to argue in the meeting crisis that we given what's happening in their generation for ecog. So we have to because that's what those movements are doing expand the notion of naturalism such that it can reincorporate us back within it. So that's where I would that's where I would sort of say well your argument there's a sense in which I think your argument flows but there is a sense in which you need to step aside and perhaps say as you did you did it parenthetically at one point at least the naturalism that Lewis was talking about at the beginning of the 20th century. And I think a fair thing to do is to note that there are many people who and I think part of what their motivation is is they want to respond to the fact that we don't fit in the worldview are really trying to expand naturalism. Now that of course then just just the question is whether or not that project can be successful. But I thought it was important to bring that up. No I think that's helpful. Part of I think what we struggle with is especially when we're dealing across some tribal borders that well Christians are ill informed of the variety of positions in the non-Christian world and often non-Christians are ill informed of the variety of positions in the Christian world. We're at where we're totally we've got 24 hours a day and the third of it we have to sleep and take care of ourselves. And it's it's just really important that we talk to one another to make sure that we are actually being fair with one another about things like this. Yeah. So thank you. I think that's important. Please continue. OK. So so here you are talking about Kant and that was I've listened to that lecture about five times. That was one of my favorites. Thank you. And I want to take a little bit of Lewis and a little bit of Pascal and put them together for the sake of science because science is a very important piece of this whole conversation obviously. And I think the practice of science and this is where I get some of the the as if that Jordan had Jordan Peterson has has sported all over with his business about God. I think in the practice of science and I think this is a legitimate practice we act as if the universe is. Is connected deeply and there might be different ways that it's connected. But in science in a sense we act as if there is no God. And I think that is legitimate. And I've spoken with numbers of Christian scientists who when I listen to them carefully about their practice and how they piece together their faith and and and and their practice of science. That's what I hear from them. And in your and so we in a sense approach it with the spirit of geometry. And I think that's real. And your lectures where you talked that were in some of these cognitive side where you're OK we want a non homuncular argument and we want a non circular argument. Those lectures have been hugely helpful for me for helping me get my head around basically. OK what are we doing when we're trying to do science. Yeah I think that's very important. I mean thank you for saying that. I mean science has a particularly important status. You know with respect to our ontology and to pretend that's not the case I think. Well I think that's pretentious. I think we we just have to acknowledge that science has a has a special role with respect to our ontology. I am not a positivist. I do not think that science has the sole right over you know sole exclusive rights and privileges over our ontology. But I'm not but neither do I want to deny because you know I practice it neither do I want to deny that it has a very significant and special role in our ontology. And so I am has I'm critical of both of those moves. Oh good. I'm critical of people who want to like it what who want to assert that science is the only thing that can do our ontology because one of the things science can't do is establish the ontology of science and other things like this right. So in positivism and logical positivism I think one of the few philosophical positions that you can say are properly dead. Right. And so I reject that. But I also reject people who think that they can do ontology without paying attention to science. I think I just that's a non that's a nonstarter for me. And so go ahead. No. Well I was going to say and so this I think it's legitimate for Christians to. And so there's a lot of Christians and I you know someone made the comment today on Twitter someone who's listening to our stuff. Nostalgia is a medication that people apply. How did he say it. Something to that. When they're when their worldview has a virus. And I thought that's you know that's right. So OK we're going to close our eyes to science but we're going to go fill up the tank who's where the oil was found by geologists who are employing the science. And Christians don't go to the doctor and say you practice biblical anatomy. I mean exactly exactly. Right. And you know in my in my recent Q&A and you were there by the way I saw that. Thank you very much. I was pointing out like you've got to pay attention to cognitive science and artificial intelligence because it is coming and it is going to shake up your ontology and what it is to be a person way more than Darwin and way more than Copernicus ever did. And for pretending it's not going to happen is not helpful. It is not helpful. We have to start thinking about this now. You know really deeply right now. So that's why I think it's important. And so then I guess that the main point of this slide for me is that in science we whether or not you're a theist or whatever you're something you in a sense bracket these and say OK with respect to the world I'm going to pursue the world as if the spirit of the spirit of geometry can continue to gain ground. Right. And so I mean and I one way in which I stand aside from that and this is a tricky thing because I feel that it's fair to say I'm criticizing them from within a scientific perspective via cognitive science. But one of the themes of the series has been the criticism of the reduction. Notice that word of all knowing to propositional knowing which of course is what science generates. Science generates propositional knowing and propositional truths. And that's those are really important. But the practice of science depends on procedural knowledge which depends on perspectival knowing which ultimately depends on our participatory attunement. And so you have to be very very careful right to remember like what you're talking about and not to confuse properties of your theorizing with properties of what you're theorizing about. There was a there's a scholar that people throw me stuff all the time now named Drew Johnson who he's an Old Testament scholar and he's working in some of this field and he noted the the participate the procedural similarities between ancient people conducting a sacrifice and modern scientists conducting an experiment. That's not as that's that. And you can see that also in bacon right. He talks about putting nature on the rack and torturing her to reveal her secrets. So yeah there there the way it I mean and Polanyi was was very important on this and that's why he's had such a huge influence on me too. That we have to always remember the practitioners of science and not treat science as if it fell from the sky. That's very important. OK. So now for the sake of humanity and our sense of aloneness we also act so we act as if it's you know the whole show can be can give way continually to the spirit of geometry. We also act as if the universe is not the whole show and we aspire to not treat people as objects and we demand that we not be treated as objects and we act as if there's an important category of person and this important category is rightly approached with the spirit of finesse. So I think that's important. Sorry I'm not my cough is in no way indicative. I'm literally just got something quite my throat. Well so first of all the centrality of person I picked up a book and I'm going to start reading it soon by Josiah Royce because he tried to build an ontology in which person and personhood was central. So I think we should talk about that. So can I ask you and this is an open question what do you mean by we act as if it's not the whole show. Do you mean that we feel that there's there's meaning and normativity like that people should be treated in a certain way right there and that people are working in terms of meaning not just in terms of physical properties. Is that what you mean by we think there's more to the show. Yes. And if if if let's say you are having you're having a heated conversation with a significant other and let's say you feel that you let's say a spouse have been married 31 years now so you get to know someone pretty well after 31 years. I would hope so. And you feel you feel that you sort of know you sort of have the other person figured out and now in your mind you've sort of put them on the side of the spirit of geometry. Number one people do that. It doesn't go very well. And usually wrong because this is at least as much a function of our limitation. If you're even after 31 years of marriage my wife will do things that I'll think I didn't see that coming. And this is what I meant when I said Pascal's things are what Pascal is talking about is an existential mode. So what I hear you say so tell me if I'm wrong. What I hear you saying is we ultimately can't have an eye relationship to people. We can when we're getting on the bus and stuff like that. But you know we're bound to them in friendship or love right. Or as in your case your lucky case marriage has not worked out so well for me. But I'm glad it's worked well for you. We can't have just an eye relationship with them. We also have to have an eye. Is that what you're saying. And there's OK. But so part of what I think that's deeply right. I know I talk about this in one of the four episodes at the very end of the series a bit when I'm talking when I go into depth about Heidegger and also a little bit about Harmon and what's called speculative realism because one of the things they're arguing because you had you had the you had the contian picture up a minute ago. Yeah. So if I could just talk about this a little bit because I think even if you are you know in in the ultimate sense disagree with it I think you'll find this valuable and useful. So what one of the things the speculative realists are talking about and here's how they were influenced in important way. Well I won't go into that but one convergent line is I think there's a similarity to the early romantics that had such a huge influence on barfield. So what's this notion. Let's go back to the thing in itself right. So you've got Heidegger and I won't get into Heidegger full blown because that's huge. But but I will later in the series. Right. But Heidegger has this notion of you know at the level of participatory knowing truth isn't the correctness of our propositions. The correctness of that proposition ultimately depends on an attunement between the agent and the arena and the kind of attunement I or I thou has a terrific effect on what we can judge to be correct. Does that is that all working and you see how it fits in with what we're talking about. Editor points out that this ala fair which is the Greek word for let me means to to forget. So it's this kind of deep remembering this existential remembering. How did it points out. Or he argues. And this is something that I think it's really sort of phenomenologically profound that the art and phenomenon means to shine. This is something that Jordan Peterson advertises a lot about right. Right. And so right as the object is shining into our frame I'm going to use a little bit of my language right and becoming relevant and salient to us. It is always also simultaneously withdrawing in its combinatorially explosive real reality. And let me use my language a little bit more closely. So he talks about the withdrawal and the shining. And the argument is and you can see this in some of the work I'm doing with Dan Shapion virtual reality like like that to have a world wheel isn't just that everything right is disclosed in this intelligible pattern of confirmation to us that world also as I am right as it's shining into my frame I have it has to be simultaneously a mess with the sense that it is withdraw withdrawing into this moreness this moreness from which and so I've coined a term for trying to say what all these people are talking about we don't have the thing in itself. We have the thing beyond itself. Everything is a thing beyond itself. Right. So this is one of the I think the key notions of at least Harman's work and others that it's not just people and this is not meant to diminish the moral status of people. OK. But it's like but what Harman argues is right. Our sense of ourselves as a person helps us to gain access to this way in which things the thing is beyond itself. And this is how you see to be a person is to have a non logical identity between what I am in my frame and what's what I'm going to become as I move into another frame beyond it. That's what that's why narrative work like look you look at a picture of yourself when you're one year old you go there I am. That's not a logical identity. Like all the so many of the properties are not shared. It's a narrative identity. It's a non logical identity and persons are a mesh with non logical identity. But here's the argument. Everything is right. This cop right there's a non logical identity between how it shines into my frame of relevance and how it's always simultaneously and in a mutually supporting fashion withdrawing in its into its combinatorial explosive richness that is beyond my capacity to fully frame it. And so for me this is a way at least I think and I don't know if this is helpful to you or not about how right. The notion of personhood again not to remove its its moral privilege right gives us a participatory way of knowing everything of picking up on the you know the intelligible the this inexhaustible moreness that constantly is a fecund fountain of new intelligibility but that intelligibility never drains the thing dry. And so that's why like I said in virtual reality you know if I can drain the world dry it's not very real. It always has to be beyond me but it also has to be you know frameable by me and those two we have these two this non logical polar sense of realness to use one of our other main terms that I think is deeply at work. And I see this as some of the most exciting work that's going on right now in ontology. Now here's what I have to say about that. I find that deeply consistent with the notion of naturalism that I'm working with. So that's where you and I may be pull apart because I'm not trying to undermine one of your premises. Right. I'm trying to say look I think that there's a deep connectedness and I'm trying to argue for it between you know our participatory experience of ourselves as person within the existential mode of I doubt and our ability to to make contact with the thing beyond itself that everything is. And I think that's really really important. But I think I can explain that naturalistically in terms of this language of what's inside the frame right. And the right and the common sort of explosive reality that's always outside the frame and conditioning it behind the scenes in ways that I of course don't know from within my frame. Well I to the degree that I understood what you just went through and I think I'm sorry. I hope I think I did and I think actually you helped me in my subsequent points because that's very similar to the point I want to make with respect to this mode this this this approach to the world. Yes. I also and we're not going to get into it in this conversation one of my I mean the thing that started me down this crazy rabbit trail to begin with and what interested me about Jordan's work when I first came across it was the the what was that I think Christianity especially Protestantism has in some ways continued to and Jonathan Peugeot's word just kind of float away from a boat away from the material world into a sort of Gnosticism and certain I'm not going to name names but certain branches even of of Protestant and evangelical Christianity when I when I look at how they talk I think they're they're really rather Gnostic. And I mean I grew up in that world and so I mean yeah at least a form of Gnosticism that is deserving of criticism Gnosticism is a very heterogeneous as well. That's why I tried to pull Gnostic free from Gnosticism in the work that I've been trying to do. But one of the one of the deep one of the deep challenges that I think pastors face right now is to is to understand the understand Genesis one in terms of the goodness of the material world and what the material world is for. Now for me I've talked a lot about the fact that I think what the material world is actually for is glory but I don't want to get too sidetracked. So but my understanding of your articulation in this in this movement towards and away at the same time in terms of person that's very much I think that's very much consistent with with the next couple of slides which is again persons we regard with an agent arena relationship. They are the people always argue about free will and I say I don't really like the term free will because our will is far from free but I think our agency is real. Yes I prefer that way of talking about it too. I think it is important. I guess free will is how get into trouble saying this. I think free will is a mongrel concept. I think it's a confused concept in many important ways because I frankly don't know what people want when they want it. But that's another discussion. Let's agree that agency is a better way of talking about it. Let's go forward. Absolutely. So and and and we see and what we see when we see persons are these. This is where I get some of Peugeot stuff. We see a complex of powerful entities and Peterson talks about this too. I as a person am I have all of these you know I have all these desires. I have all of these needs. I have all of these experiences and and somehow all of this you know somehow all of this has to somehow cohere within me. And actually this Sunday I'm preaching on the the demoniac that Jesus chases out the and and it goes into the pigs and that's right. And Peterson and Peugeot also talk about you know we have all these sub personalities and person we respect and actually and I really loved how you treated addiction and I had never heard that take on Buddhism before. That fascinated me and this but it very much has to do with agency. Yes the loss of agency I think is is is a better way of understanding suffering rather than the pain metaphor. Yeah I think so because as I argued most of the matter I like most in a big sense of most of the metaphors the Buddha uses are entrapment and feathering and enslavement metaphors. They're not metaphors of pain. Right. And so yeah I think I'm on solid hermeneutic ground there to make that argument. So that so there's a deep connection between persons and agency and yes and we we instinctively I don't know if that's the right word but we intuitively respond in that way to persons and and I'm going to get to. I'll say that for the next slide but but there's also having said that that in a sense that that's this kind of aloneness in the universe that we feel ourselves to be as persons at the same time we also embrace the spirit of geometry at work within ourselves and each other to our betterment. Sure of course. And as a pastor someone will say if you can help me understand the the science behind me why I am so attached to this thing over here or why I'm doing these things over here that are clearly destructive to the integration of a a rich powerful agent that I wish to become. Please pastor help me help me work on this and we in a sense apply the spirit of geometry in many ways to that. So these are not are not living in disconnected universes. No I like we I mean so yeah and you the way you invoked Mark Lewis there his thought we have the science of the reciprocal narrowing but of course the addict is not is also experiencing that as a modal which is what I tried to argue as as as an existential modal thing as well. Yeah that's very good Paul I like that I like the fact that in our lives right we find these two modes deeply interpenetrating with each other and perhaps that harkens back to the point I made about how the two hemispheres understood functionally right are almost always interdependent and doing opponent processing together. Yes. So I think yeah I agree with that I think that's I think that's that's very plausible. Now we are also persons looking at persons and because we are persons looking at persons there's a sort of circularity that complicates the spirit of geometry mode and if you're a clinical psychologist or if you're a pastor and you're working with someone who is deeply troubled and in trouble you you always have to sort of watch yourself as you're dealing with them because there's there's projection there's bullshitting there's status there's all of these games that we're playing with each other. And this gets into something that I've commented off and Brett Weinstein talks about well once we realize we're programmed assassin romans we simply transcend that programming and I think oh my. Yeah I don't quite I don't quite know what I mean I talk a lot about transcendence in my series and I try to I try to do a lot of work as to how you know how how simultaneously how important that concept is. It's an axial age inheritance but also how difficult that is to articulate it. And so a lot of what I do it is trying to are trying to carefully articulate that and the kind like. I mean I make arguments following L.A. Paul and later also. Agnes Collard and also arguments from cognitive science Jerry Fodor and others. You can't sort of infer your way through self-transcendence it doesn't work that way. So I'm not quite sure what Weinstein means certain simply propositionally knowing it and running implications off of it is not going to give you self-transcendence. This is not it's not a careful enough analysis of the problem that we face when we try to give a solid theoretical explanation of what's going on when people are engaged in genuine transformative experience. That's why I spend so much time and come back to it in different places again and again and again in the series because I take the problem very seriously. And you're dead on. And as a pastor all my experience and my experience just as a person watching myself and again having you know living within a Christian profession where you always have this model of Christ that you hold yourself up to and just you know fail you know love your neighbor as yourself all the way up to and including your enemies it's like oh you know how I perpetually you know perpetually fail. And and so and part of how so we use this objectivity and what I've coined as sort of a monarchical vision we try to self transcend and see ourselves objectively but that's always a I mean that's always an aspirational attempt. We do it and you'll be pleased to know that I spent considerable time at the end the last four episodes of the series developing Agnes Collard's very important philosophical work on aspiration and aspirational rationality and what that means and how that's relevant. I argue she does and I argue to the whole notion of the divine double or as I call it the sacred second self because you see that in young you see that until like you see that of course in the ancient world so all of that I think all of that I would call it all that mythos is a reflection of what we try to do in order to try and afford these kinds of genuine aspirational self transcendence. And so then the the conclusion is we rightly approach persons with this spirit of finesse when I when I approach my wife I do so with a little bit of fear and trembling because you know great things are at stake yes and the spirit of finesse is the appropriate mode of approaching persons because of their complexity and power and respect for persons is hard one is a hard one practical and I think a successful cultural adaptation for sure I agree with that. West our regard for one another and say okay we are we are going to treat other people not as so often you see people treated in the ancient world for example or in many times and places even here within families we treat people with respect. And yeah part of what's going on is whether or not we can extend the category person to animals and other creatures precisely to afford that kind of respect. One one thing to say about this that I think would just this is I think strengthens your position. Alessio Urraro who you've heard me mention in the series because she's the whole person about the idea of you know the sets of constraints and she talks about the fact that Jonathan will love this that when you're trying to interact with dynamical systems and let's take it that whatever else they are human beings as persons are dynamical systems they're going to get self-organizing things but you know ecologies or environments are also complex dynamical system. She says and this is an important argument that needs to be taken seriously and this goes towards how we access the correct sort of existential mode. She says the reason we use narrative not just because it talks like it puts out certain strings and statements. Narrative gets you right basically in the correct mode of processing because of the way you have flash forward flashback many layers of processing and it's all unfolding in this dynamic self-organizing manner. She said when if you're practicing narrative what it does is it actually puts you into the right mode of mind and I would argue the right mode of being for tracking complex dynamical systems very successfully. Now notice she doesn't say and this is where maybe you and I would part company she doesn't say that that means that the ecology is actually running a narrative or something like that but to use language that again I'm developing in this series the narrative is often indispensable to us for connecting to dynamical systems. Now the thing about indispensability is the concern I have about it is and I'm concerned that people confuse indispensability with metaphysical necessity. Let me give you an example where those clearly and clearly come apart. English is indispensable to me I'm not bilingual in any measurable fashion but I don't think it's metaphysically necessary that every every cognitive agent speaks English in order to practice cognition or communicate. So while it's indispensable to me it's not metaphysically necessary to a person for example and that's clearly I think uncontroversially the case. So I tend to think that we need to we need to not be dismissive and say oh it's just a symbol this is what I think Jonathan would like that oh when you talk about the forest narratively it's just a symbol he hits that dismissive attitude and I agree with that totally right but so I would say I would strengthen it as something stronger like like no it's indispensable for us and it's it's indispensable for getting us into the right way of coupling that participatory knowing the agent arena activation that we can actually track the forest well. I don't think it's metaphysically necessary though and here's where we might part company but I'm just stating it I don't think that licenses any conclusions that the forest is itself a narrative or the forest is behaving narratively in and of itself so that's where that's how I would respond to this argument. Well I think again you're you're you're we're very much tracking and okay I well I'll just continue now now we're going to get into some stretching on some things. We regard collectives and you talked to JP a little bit about this I thought that was a very interesting part of the conversation we regard collectives of people as persons of sorts and we we treat groups of people with the spirit of finesse too uh families cities nations civilizations we represent them mentally you know I often I ask I will ask sometimes people the question is uncle Sam real now there's no man who's got this top hat and we'll dress in red white you can find them at parades this gets into Jonathan Peugeot's is Santa Claus real and but uncle Sam wants you and and this is where you sort of get into Peugeot and I think biblical the apostle Paul ideas of principalities and powers in terms of what they are and your comment about metaphysics I think is is is apt here too and we'll just we'll just leave that there. Historical processes Jordan Peterson when he talks about the future and sacrifice in this in this talk the video is actually taken down now I don't know why but this talk that he did in Easter 2018 is a very interesting idea about we negotiate with the future via a sacrifice and if you look at human history at some sense this seems to work and is it does it work because people you know you can have all kinds of other questions about why this might work within a naturalistic frame but we negotiate with the future and and so similar to the point I think you just made about this other this other author's work this there are real reasons for doing this. Yeah I think that's very much the case that's why again I I dislike a lot of the dismissive debunking of the what you call the celebrity atheist precisely because they they they don't ask the right question or maybe or or they just assume they have an easy answer to it that the reason why people do this is because they're stupid or irrational. That's often not a good explanation of a lot of why people are doing things they are doing that you know have this long-term survivability and viability and efficaciousness. Look you know we do most of our problem solving collectively and and and if we do not know how to relate to that collective in a way that we can comport our identity to participate in it we're messing ourselves up very badly but now again I think all of that is you know indispensable this was of course a famous point made by Durkheim you know and that you know we're not going to be and that you know and and that we will tend to regard that access to the collective as something even sacred so I think that and of course Durkheim is a completely naturalistic thinker so so nevertheless he's very he's saying but why why do we why is it important why does it seem indispensable that we talk this way so I agree with that and I mean like I said we're in the conversation I have with JP like if you go to like a circling event or other events here here are these people coming out of you know very much post-post-christian when normally secular thing and yet they talk about what emerges in the collectivity with very often very religious language and and it's and this is where you know say if I were sitting down with celebrity atheist I would ask them is uncle Sam real what you're relative the relative the same thing that one of the people who did you know one of the the creators of fourth generation of third generation side he said he said you know is England real that's right like what like what do you mean like what are you gonna how are you gonna answer that like if you have a very simplistic ontology you're gonna give a wrong answer either way well yes but what oh real enough to make you pay your taxes well and go to war with Germany that's right right and things like that and and Harman makes a similar argument the guy from speculative realism he talks about the Dutch East Indian Company he says like how you know does this exist of course it exists but it doesn't exist as a spatial temporal object of a specific duration it's smeared across time and smeared across space right and smeared across people that's right there's people that come in and come out of it and so yeah this is what I mean about you you have to have a non-reductive ontology if you want to be able to talk about things I think in in a way that just does justice to them and again like I say I see people really Morton talks about this he has a book called Hyper Objects where he says well is evolution real well evolution isn't you know in a place or taking up its particular time and space but if you don't believe evolution is real like what the heck are you doing like what scientific worldview are you invoking such that you could appear in that scientific worldview and so yeah I think again there's deep reasons for what you're saying yeah so and and then we regard in a sense non-human living persons we afford animal rights limited you know personality we name animals we have companion animals for the lonely animals are meaningful to us you know even even plants to a degree well you know back in the 70s we talked to plants and all these sort of anti-entropic entities that that they're very real to us well I and I think there's good evidence I mean it's not small but it's not great but the idea of biophilia that we we and this is a non-utilitarian sense we love these things simply because they are autopoetic entities and we can it's part of and I mean this in the positive sense it's part of the way our self-love allows us to automatically love these other love these other living things yeah so and then we also act as if complex and powerful inorganic entities are persons in some ways we name our cars and our machines now we fully know that they are they they open up to us with the spirit of geometry when we take them to the mechanic and and suddenly tweety is the car the name of a woman in my church who has a car with a you know her now car is named tweety or i have a car named ed i have a car named nelson um and we know we fully know that these cars are not persons in the sense that even you know certainly my wife is or even my dog is to a certain degree but you know nuclear reactors chernobyl that that that becomes in a sense a a living thing in a way immaterial systems and institutions this gets into uncle stan and we approach all of these things quite rightly and i think you made the point much better than i did a few minutes ago sort of with the spirit of finesse we treat them as persons and that's the best way for us in a sense to to approach them so here's something that you'll need to enter into dialogue with and so i don't expect you to do it now one of the four horsemen of the apocalypse dan denet actually talks about this he talks about it in his idea of we take the intentional stance uh towards things um so he says like very often like towards our car his example like towards your computer you act you act as if you take the intentional stance because it massively facilitates your capacity to interact with your computer now i mentioned that of course because he is one of the celebrity atheists yes he so that's a that's a that's a point uh i don't know if i i'm not making a specific claim myself here i'm just pointing to you that your argument i think bears the responsibility of considering how denet talks about something very similarly and comes to some very different conclusions from the conclusions you do well we'll we'll see we'll see because i don't think i'm making a big argument with this with this argument uh well maybe i am i don't know i think you're making a good argument and i think it's insightful um i understand what you want to do you want to protect yourself appropriately from inappropriate criticism but i i mean i i think you're doing something that many people would find a value and so it only would only help to strengthen it okay so so then powerful complex things in nature and in a sense nature itself this is where the ancients if you read lewis's discarded image you know nature goes so he goes through all this ancient literature the classical and then the medieval period and you know nature was a woman we have mother nature and and and and and we're very dismissive in in the modern realm we came became very dismissive of this approach and i think i think what in many ways what we have is sort of a communal cultural bias against this that i'm not sure that bias is is well well it's it's difficult in that i i completely i i very much understand the distinction calling nature a woman might not be a metaphysical claim but um it certainly is a an appropriate claim in terms of how human beings relate to entities such as yeah and the point you're making is it's not just an appropriate claim it's an affording claim yes it's a way of thinking that puts you into a valuable mode of interaction yes of course this is an argument and it's often misrepresented and sometimes because the argument is presented very clearly but this is an argument made by indigenous people right that we talk we we didn't just talk this way this way of the where we we talk about the spirits and everything right it put us into a particular way of relating to the world that seems much more healthy uh than the the the viewpoint that's criticizing that way of talking and i think that's an important thing to pay attention to again being and you are taking care you know not to confuse what might be psychologically and even culturally indispensable to us with making assertions about the metaphysical existence or necessity of certain ways of talking and thinking and and you know even though jp is making his points about panpsychism i i and probably have a separate conversation with him i see panpsychism as a sense of solving a bunch of problems by going all over on the other side of the line and i'm not quite sure yeah we have to do that and so i'm ready to make that jump you know i agree i mean i mean jp is very careful of course and he's also i mean in the one he did the most recent one we did you know we've got this wonderful bridging discourse between panpsychism and the kind of naturalism that i'm i'm sort of presenting here to you as well and i found that really really beneficial though the there's a trilogy and the one he did in between was really good because he when he's comparing his position in mind he talks about it in terms of the and i like this because it's great language because it's ultimately about a kind of cognitive commitment he talks about about different kinds of risks that the different positions have and i think that uh and i think that's that's very important and so he he does something um i really like it he said you know um there's enough continuity and i have enough respect for revaki's position that if mine is wrong i can default to his which he said and that and that's kind of a that's kind of a brilliant pragmatic argument he says so you know why shouldn't i take the riskier thing because you know i've got his position to fall back on i thought that's very clever that's that's very smart that that's quite good strange application of pascal's wager yeah it is exactly it's it's in it but but a well-placed one i thought it's like because it takes the care to articulate well what risks he says he says you know there's a greater chance that i'm wrong because i'm postulating extra entities and blah blah blah blah but right you know but there's benefits to it and i acknowledge the benefits in the third discussion we had i said yeah you get access right to an established tradition established guides established models of course there's there's enormous benefit and to pretend that's not the case is also i think this in general yeah so so we we act as if um you know weather and climate we both neither you nor i nor anyone who's on this side that who's not believing in say panpsychism would say weather and climate these are i would be in a sense a naturalist with respect to them in many ways but at the same time we approach them with the spirit of geometry and we'll learn more and more about the weather our models will get better and better however in a sense we also treat them with the spirit of finesse and that we respect the weather and and we have our models and and this a lot of this is coming from a recognition of our limitations very much and like i said that we're dealing with very complex systems and often we can put ourselves in an appropriate mode for coupling to them yes uh in ways that i think jonathan would be okay with me saying that are symbolic yes right and i think that's important yes so now we're going to get into the definition of god that i want to get into we'll see if this gets me in hot water and and this comes out of it's a clip i played quite often in a number of my talks where where jordan is talking to sam harris and they have the moment towards the end of their first vancouver conversation where the event is about to end and you know sam harris is there to to take jordan down because jordan is way too soft on theists and god and so they okay jordan who is god and jordan reads this rather lengthy list of things which i think a lot of people just kind of thought what's he talking about and at the end of it sam's like that's not god but i thought sam you don't know enough history yeah because you know enough about all the religions that's right right right uh yeah okay i'm not going to go on about sir sir well and so and what i came up with out of there is that now i'm not saying there are two gods in christian theism and i'm not even making an argument that this is christianity this is sort of a a theism i'm making an argument for but but one definition of god especially god number one now i split this out of an isaiah passage in isaiah when god shows up at the temple the the angels cry out um holy holy holy is the lord god almighty that's the transcendent god the god who is different you know for the hebraeus if a hole is deep it's deep if it's very deep it's or it's deep deep if it's the deepest possible hole it's deep deep deep that's how hebru language works ah so holy holy holy means really holy that's right as holy as could be right so god is as holy he's as transcendent as could be he's as other as could be and the whole world is full of his glory right so you've got these two sides and for me so what jordan peterson basically does is says god is the system of all systems he is you know so all of this darwinian selection all of these mechanics all of this built-in stuff for jordan and his ideas sort of his ideas of god god is the system of all systems so that's god number one and god number two is god is the person of all persons now now again this again once you say the word god this should be like a rule like that nazi rule once you mention nazi in an argument it kind of goes over the edge in a sense once you say the word god everything is always in danger of going over the edge but but god but so again when i talk to a lot of people i can't believe in god well thinking about some man up in the sky or and it's like well god is the system of all systems god is the person of all system of persons god is in a sense this this this thing that we use in terms of how many different systems that we have sort of like using dark matter to equalize the equations in the universe you don't know what it is it's dark but you kind of need it to equalize the equations and so we rightly explore god with a spirit of geometry as we do with other persons but we also rightly relate with god the system of all systems and the person of all persons with the spirit of finesse as we do with all systems because it's it's it's holy holy holy so this is the craziest of all my slides probably no no no this is the funnest so first of all a clarification question i want to i want to make sure i'm not mismapping things are you saying because i'm not sure about what i'm saying are you saying that god one the system of all systems is born out of the spirit of geometry and god two the person of all persons is born under the spirit of finesse or that we do both the spirit of geometry and the spirit of finesse to both god one and both god two which one of those is it both i asked for a distinction he's a yeah yeah well in a sense well and so i so once i had this idea and once i said it people kept writing me about this idea and it's so weird because it's like oh why does this idea so what this idea somehow hits salience in the jordan peterson community like no other idea i talked about and i thought well that is interesting yeah and and so god number one is in a sense the a a god of natural theology that is you know he's built into the stuff of the world because when i see system i hear spirit of geometry i hear right what i've got i mean i'm so this is you know triggering hagel in me right so what i've got is i've got this or i've got this i've got this comprehensive and all-inclusive pattern of intelligibility and that seems to me to be the epitome of the spirit of geometry because of kirkegard's you know critique of hagel he made a system and then he sat down beside it because he couldn't live within it whereas i right and i see how you're using it god number two as um i don't know what the noun here is paul so forgive me someone something that you live with rather right that it's not just something that is an articulated pattern of intelligent so i see god two as being born out of the spirit of finesse a la kirkegard and god one being born out of the spirit of geometry a la hagel but but that's not correct you're saying that that's it is you do the cringy move so yeah it's it's extremely difficult because and and i'm not trying to i'm not trying to figure that yeah okay you know if if the you know and you and i come at this by having a career of reading the bible and trying to interpret it for people right of course there's there's sort of the divine passive all throughout scripture where you know jonathan saw his son and his armor bear see a group of philistines and say let's go attack these uncircumcised fellows who knows what god might do right and and that's that's sort of god number one right it's also sort of god number two god can be very impersonal sometimes right right and and that is revealed in creation now there's there's other christian narratives at work at play and i just want to set all that stuff aside for now but at the same time in the hebrew you know so aristotle god is this unmoved mover and right you know lewis nicely treats that in the discarded image sure but but this but this aristotelian god can feel nothing because he's completely unmoved yeah he's kind of the the the grandest of narcissists but uh so i mean let's let's talk let's play that place a little bit so an initial response is to invoke glutinous in response to aristotle and say aristotle right like the aristotle isn't doesn't go far enough because beyond any summative thing unmoved mover there is the one and the one is no kind of thing at all it's not even a kind of principle it's not even truth or goodness or justice it is that which makes truth goodness and justice right or beauty truth goodness and beauty possible and their interrelations possible it's what makes each one it makes the truth system possible and the goodness system possible and and and the beauty system possible and how all of those are systematically related in some meta system that we're still trying to figure out but the one it transcends all of those precisely because it is what you need to explain how they are systems and how they are systems together so now that sounds simultaneously impersonal to me because there's no thingness to this and whatever else persons are they seem to be things um right uh and it's of course you know it seems to be you know the the holy holy but it seems to be the holy holy of god too right because it's it's the god right it's it's the god beyond all possible gods where we understand a god is a thing um and part of what i see christianity doing at least i've tried to argue this is trying to wed that neoplatonic notion that really sort of vouchsafes the transcendent no thingness i'm going to use the word no thingness to not insult people the transcendent no thingness of god with our capacity to get into the depths of things here and now there's a deep there's a sense in which the moreness of things there's an immanence aspect and that those are ultimately and i'll use a term that i invoked earlier there's a non-logical identity between them i see christianity as trying to do that and one of the things i appreciated by the way recently is jonathan pageau in his discussion with you and i think i noted this in the comments made an excellent criticism of christianity and comments made an excellent criticism of you know the neoplatonic purely emanation of you and so one more thing just to throw into this mix about trying to get god to god one and god two and i've been trying to work out this idea inspired by daoism on one side and also by people from the eastern orthodox tradition and also from the neoplatonic tradition jon jon scott is a Regina is having a huge impact on me with his doctrine of creation because he he and this is what jonathan seemed to be articulating the problem with emanation is you get a decadence as you go down right and there's a real i forget the author i forgive me who's right an excellent book and how eroginia uses that to criticize the neoplatonic emanation right because right um because there's simultaneously the emergence back upward right there's the return and they're not they should not be thought they they're completely interpenetrating interleaving interaffording there's a long way of saying that i thought and you know i'm quite open for you telling me i'm wrong uh that what christianity was trying to do was trying to get you know the eminence which has this more this sense of how god bubbles up let's see what god might do what might emerge you know integrated with this neoplatonic no but there's right there's there's the emin there's the emanation down but to completely identify them in a non-logical manner they they are interpenetrate they're inter-forting is that fair or am i getting things yes i think that's true and i think oh wow i think i i think you know i i often sometimes i get tired of people saying well the eastern orthodox churches the orthodox church is about you know you know this the becoming truly human and i think i i always thought my church was about that too and i one thing i really appreciated about your talk about ontology is that there's this you know somehow and lewis points this out in he has this chapter in his book miracles on the grand miracle that that somehow you know god must become man and must come all the way down to the bottom in order to bring something up and he takes the whole rest of the he takes everything else with him yeah yeah and and i know i mean theologically then people get people get triggered because of all of their you know it's it's a world war one battlefield that's what christianity is in so many places all these no man's land if you take a step towards one somebody's gonna shoot and it's like hey i'm 56 years old shoot away bucko you know it's no big deal but but i think the eastern orthodox notion of theosis is really important yeah no i agree i know it sounds blasphemous to a protestant it does i mean i i would you know i you know genetically i'm protestant practically right because of the way i was brought up uh so i i get that but i understand also what jonathan's trying to do with that notion and and it's really interesting about because of course the notion of theosis you know in some ways is is independent it's it's worked out in a very complex way in neoplatonism before it's ever taken up by pseudodionysus right i mean and and you know and there's you know they they found out that it was pseudodionysus precisely because they were able to show how much he lifted from propless that's how they show that it wasn't the dionysus of st paul's time right and so again i hate people that do these either deny the neoplatonism and people like dyne pseudodionysus or try to say that it's all just neoplatonism what i'm finding interesting i'm getting a sense of that what jonathan's trying to do he's trying to show how christianity takes over this neoplatonism and then does this thing to it does this transformation and so the notion of theosis is being sort of fundamentally and i'm really interested i want him to talk more about that um i've been i'm reading a lot about this notion trying to understand it better but i want to get back to it because if you have the if you sort of agree because i see theosis as exactly the place where the emanation and the emergence are just like this together and you seem to be agreeing with that what does that like if if if we are the image dayo right if we are the image of god and we use personhood i think was what your argument is saying to get into the correct mode for relating to god i'll come back to what i have to say about that in a minute but right if theosis is the most appropriate way of talking about the fulfillment of our image and it's simultaneously emanation and emergence what does that say about god sorry you know what i'm trying to do i'm trying to say like we're making it we're trying to bring we're trying to get this really rich ontology of a person and then map it into the way things our ontology of other things and and even nature as a whole and then using that as a way of trying to say you know what is the deepest way we can couple to this reality for lack of a better term that we designate with the term god that's what i'm asking you in terms of the term god no no well maybe what i mean is no what not the term god let's put the term god sorry i want to come back to that what i mean is what does that mean about s god one and god two because because theosis right theosis seems to create an image of personhood that seems to completely evaporate the difference between god one and two and make them deeply interpenetrating in a powerful way yes so that's what i'm saying and i and i and and this is why so jonathan our last talk he said i want to talk to you about this god one god two business because people are asking me about it yeah and i am not saying obviously in christianity they're two gods but if anybody takes that interpretation they're being foolish right let's just grant that they're being foolish and they're being unfair to you you're making a you're making a conceptual distinction you're not making an a causal distinction or any other kind of distinction i get that right yeah just keep going but i i think you know i i struggle i see these two sides of it that and and then people say well it's his transcendence and his imminence that's not that's not good enough that's right and and so i haven't been able to sort of put it you know i haven't been able to figure it out but i keep seeing these well here's one thing i would say both god one and god two are both that's what i was just trying to articulate both of them are transcendent and imminent yes it's wrong to map god two or into imminence or whichever or no god one into imminence and god two into transcendence i think that's a mistake i think that's a mistake well i thought you articulated it better than i did because when i listened to you talk i thought yeah that sounds a lot better than i was saying it well okay well good so because again this so you heard in the discussion i had with um with with uh with jp right uh you know whitehead's notion and i have there's problems i have with whitehead's notion or on but you know he had this he was trying to do i think something similar with the bipolar because he was trying to say the bipolar not in the psychological sense meaning having two poles not the bipolar concept of god is not the concept of god bipolar people it's a way of talking about because he wanted to articulate two ideas which i think are really really interesting right and so let me give me a sec here right there's a sense in which he says look and this is i think and this is the this is the play dough and and white is is clear about this this is the play dough and wait there's a sense in which and you know that i think possibility is real because i've argued for that and i think that science depends on the presupposition that possibility is real so it's not actual but it's real and that's another important distinction okay so there's a there's a sense in which real possibility must really be organized because things don't come into being in some slapdash they always come into a way that has idos intelligibility so there is there is a there is a there is a forming of possibility now sorry let me finish the point right and and that's what but there's also there's also the ongoing real emergence what what white had called real novelty as the universe unfolds there's new there's constant real emergence there's real novelty ontological newness and he saw god as encompassing both of those things and neither and both of them are both imminent and transcendent to to make to say the the the god the god of possibility is the you know is is the transcendent one and the emergent one those are that's mistaken and that's why i've been avoiding the transcendence imminence language i'm trying to get this other thing with this notion to talk about the direction we're talking rather than the location you know there's the emergence of of creativity that is just all around us right but it's deeply mysterious because you know it's one of the you know the ultimate problems in in physics right and then but then there's the emanation of you'll allow me this language of you know there's a sense in which things are structured in real possibility like the idos of plato so that thing so that we can make we can make sense of that possibility and how it why actuality is intelligible to us now i think i think whitehead makes a mistake i think he he knuckles under and he says oh but the real possibility has to be in something actual and then he folds it into something like aristotle's you know unmoved mover i think ah no you you lost your nerve stop thinking that things can only be real if they're actual that that's i think that's the mistake but i i so while i'm critical of it i have like i guess i'm saying i would like you to read some of this i think i want to i haven't read hardly any whitehead i noted lewis defers to whitehead fairly often yeah the process theology is process theology open theism these become very hot topics theologically i'm not gonna focus on those things i'm not into hot water but but but it just it just strikes me that however you and you would obviously appropriate it charitably because you do that with everything but i just see that as a valuable place i mean uh i that that book by by griffiths god exists god but god g-a-w-d doesn't uh is a great here i'll go just hang on sorry i don't need to be rude to your viewers so this is a book by david ray griffin you know god exists but god g-a-w-d does not and uh this is i think might be valuable to you uh precisely because you know there's something i think analogous to what you're doing with your god one and god two but it's also a good uh i guess defense of a whiteheadian model and so it would give you uh i think some some useful stuff there's also nicholas maxwell's book i i got to meet uh nicholas maxwell he's got a book called cutting god in half and putting the two pieces back together again which i think is exactly and and part of it is he thinks part of what's going on in the meeting crisis and i didn't get a chance to talk about it in this series and i regret that so i'm talking about it now right is that part of what we're trying to do in the meeting crisis is get these two back these two halves back together again so i would recommend those two books as um as a valuable resource for you to i think help well give you more vocabulary and and even a foil for your thinking no that's really helpful because again for me i'm i'm stumbling my way through this so we all are this is intuitive and and you know i kept watching i kept watching this conversation fall out and it's like there's and then more people come and ask me questions and i have to think about it some more and and and this is this is where it's this is where it's gone i tried to contribute with my talk of you know it's very helpful the the the the deeply inter affording interleaving emanation and emergence rather than talking about you know things in places talking about you know the directionality in which we're trying to unfold ontological relations i think that's that's a more useful way of talking for me at least well and you know there's a very old long conversation in christianity about you know in some ways in some ways platonism can be very static yeah and what what especially when you put the new testament out to the old testament you get a very you get a very active movement towards an end and this launched in this launched in my own tiny little subculture a a spat between infralapsarianism and superlapsarianism exactly and but but these this was a you know hot debate and in fact there were a cut there was a there were a couple of professors at calvin college who lost their job poking around in iranius and making some comments about this because this gets into the question of so you have creation fall redemption restoration consummation to to what to what extent is is this story of christ necessary for god to achieve that which he wants to achieve in this entire project of the world and you can very quickly you know you can very quickly see that lots of things get put in play in a conversation like that and and and a lot of people who are looking to protect god's reputation or ideas about god's reputation in certain ways things things get very complicated in a conversation like that but it gets very much into i've really enjoyed hearing your you know okay it isn't it isn't just emergence it isn't just eminence but there seems i mean when you talk about there is a there is a now obviously in terms of christian theology god starts this business um we have a we don't have an eternal universe to the degree that we know it but to what degree is the telos that god is reaching for from the drama that we find in christianity the creation of the world you know all of this stuff to what degree must this lapse is it necessary for god to achieve something and that that that turns theological lights on all over the room and i don't know that we can answer this my father actually this was a spat when he was in seminary and so he was he people arguing at it and he said are within a calvinist framework of decrees and all that particular theology in our little corner are you willing are you telling me that you're having a fight over which logical step god took in his mind before the cretacean creation of the world how on earth could you know that so but you know but this all does get tied up into these questions of what is god it gets very complicated so i appreciate the i appreciate how how much you grabbed onto it and i'm gonna have to listen to everything that you said again to really get my mind around and check out those two books because the this is all part of this question of of christianity and how it relates to what is god what is he up to where is he going what is he doing why does the world bother to exist at all well thank you for saying that i mean here's one way in which i would argue the way i'm talking about it has an advantage because when you when you put it in terms of emanation and emergence you can articulate the tension i think much more clearly emergence says that the effect is greater than the cause that's what it is for something to emerge emanation says the cause is and this is an axionatic principle in neoplatonism the cause is always greater than the effect and so what you're ultimately talking about again is again your notion of realness and what you how you fundamentally see the relationship between cause and effect at a deep ontological level so i think one of the advantages of this terminology this you know this conceptual vocabulary that i brought to it is it you know it really articulates the deep connection between ways of talking about god and ways of talking and our sort of fundamental presuppositions about realness and causation and and how they're operating so i think you know i think it it it does some important work of clarification in that way okay a little bit about reality and i really loved i hadn't thought about potential but by as i've been working through this i mean i'm trying to think about what what how on earth can i understand this word reality and that which is real and and finally sort of what i'm coming up with is reality is that which finally controls colonizes wins endures and so then you're i you know you're talking about potential as being real i think is important in that because we are i mean stuff is time static emergent i mean all this stuff gets so hard but but it should be hard often often when i hear people talking about real there's a there's an there's an implicit materialism well this this this cell phone stand is real because it's material and it's like because it's material and it's like yeah but the the molder the machine bender that created this stand was more real than the metal that it bent in a certain sense so figuring out how this word uses in how this goes in language and and this very much then gets deeply connected with the meaning crisis i think so yeah i think so well that's why i've tried to i've tried to and you you've criticized me on this not unfairly but i tried to limit the notion of truth to propositional knowing and then i talk about power for procedural knowing i talk about presence for perspectival and i talk about attunement for participatory because i think they all contribute in different ways within different modes to realness and so i try to reserve realness for the comprehensive term that brings all of those together so when we find things when we find that the truth and the power and the presence and the attunement are all you know in a in a manifold but what i sometimes call the the moral fold right there's a right then then that i think that's our sort of touchstone of realness i would put one thing on that something that i've been trying to articulate now and like i said i make more clear in the last four episodes is that that moreness it has a tonus to it it's the power shines in but it also mysteriously withdraws truth shines in but it withdraws right right present things are simultaneously presenting themselves but absenting themselves right right and alfeya the attunement is both right they're coming into the shining and the withdrawal thing like so when i say that i think realness encompasses truth power presence and attunement you have to understand this in this in this tonal way right right tone out that there's it's it's it's both right it's both the shining in as phenomena and also the withdrawing the perpetual withdrawing into the depths of the moreness of things this is why i i tend to think well i try i try to make an argument later that for me um and and and i'm not trying to put you in hot water i i think of sacredness more in terms of the inexhaustibleness uh rather than you know a kind of notion of authority or something like that because the inexhaustible is i see what ultimately grounds all of these and grounds the tonal relationship between them i wouldn't push authority and inexhaustible necessarily in contradiction with each other perhaps slowly slowly is is inexhaustible in there sure um i get well yeah maybe we have to talk about what i'm thinking of is models of the inexhaustible i mean this is a phrase in a notion that runs through the taotai chen right you know the tau is a well that is never used up right um and and and the idea you know the term is often used that it's inexhaustible and it's inexhaustible precisely because it's the real right right you know everything depends on being but being depends on non-being which is the dao right and it's right and and all of this and and and why that's important why i'm saying that is um because the notion uh it's the notion of and this goes to what you said about how god wouldn't show up at the grand canyon because that would actually reduce the glory of things right so what's emphasized in this otherwise deeply impersonal way of talking about the sacred the dao is the humility of the dao the humility of the dao that the dao is the ultimate regulator of things because like water it it does not assert itself it sinks and a shape shapes itself and affords itself and so this this is what i meant by a notion of the inexhaustible that is sort of um separate from a notion at least uh the notion of authority as how i have seen it articulated in the west and certainly a notion to be fair to me a notion of the authority of god that i grew up with that i found very punishing in in many ways so uh so that's why i'm separating it just to put my cards on the table and and you know that that point is is vitally important as a pastor you know i my parents um my father in fact i'll i think it's the next slide nope not yet um my my parents you know my parents were both um serious dedicated christians who who live their whole life in search of this but also just tremendously generous and open and people sometimes look at me and they wonder why i got the way that well that's because of my parents and and so on i'm just don't stop being the way you are paul i wouldn't i wouldn't be talking to you if you want the way you are i'm 56 years old i think that i think the cake is baked so um i know late std there's good evidence for late adulthood development so uh that's just not a scientifically a legitimate claim but but the but as a pastor i i think now speaking switching over into christianese language i think there are a few things that christians and especially church leaders will have to answer for more seriously than the deformation of um of the church especially when it comes to love when you when you talked about the way love functions in christianity yeah you i a lot of people you know contacted me and and said i've never heard a christian you know speak so eloquently and powerfully about the role of love in christianity and and i i felt the same way i thought i thought wow here i am a christian minister and and this man is talking about love in christian terms that is so powerful um you know it's i i i think you should you know i think you should take that as a extremely high compliment from that just i i any others who heard it please know that i do and that's thank you for saying that um and i hope you take this the right way it's meant to not to be self-aggrandizing um i've heard similar things from buddhists about what i talk about when i'm talking about the buddha and and and like some of the stuff you noted a different way of talking about dukkha and suffering and there's been a lot of buddhists that it and again my egoic grandification aside that's kind of that's very valuable because it means that the way i'm presenting stuff to both christians and to buddhas is a way that's reaching to these levels that i'm talking about that's reaching to the perspectival and the participatory and so getting that kind of feedback is very very important to me i really i really deeply appreciate it and thank you for saying that um it i'm saying it's very important to me it's it's it's an ideal that i i hold myself to when i'm trying to do the work that i do i i think again i i think you're doing a tremendous job so let's just roll out finish out the argument here sure i think people naturally repersonalize the verse post-christian i see this all the time my favorite illustration is verizon lisa and um who's talking to the universe about getting a smartphone it's right there on a verizon commercial and the demythologizing of the world hasn't made people rational in the ways that celebrity atheist imagined it would and they they sometimes um just adopt informal poorly organized pseudo religion i thought again you're again some of the last episodes where you're dealing with that talk about that i i so i totally agree with this i i think that part of what i've also argued is the notion of rational that's being used like in on youtube is such a truncated desiccated notion of rationality and and and it's it's odd because both the the psychology and some of the good philosophy about rationality uh like you know people have mentioned la paul and uh you know uh you know agnes color's whole book on aspiration is all about what she calls proleptic rationality and how we must on pain of getting into self defeating uh claims include aspiration and proleptic rationality in our model of rationality i recommend that so i think that these two things are are are both resonating in our culture i think you're right we we we gravitate towards pseudo religious ideologies um and and and and we can't we can't properly critically respond to them or cultivate wisdom within them because we have such a truncated desiccated notion of rational and i think both sides of the debate that you pointed to earlier you know what i would what i would call sort of the fundamentalist and and and the celebrity atheist the celebrity the celebrity fundamentalist and the celebrity atheist i think they're both contributing to this and that's what i try to articulate so i i i guess i'm saying in a very long-winded vervecian fashion i deeply agree with this slide i think there's something i think this is an important articulation of what's going on right now this is the last slide religion and you've never been dismissive of religion you you were right that right there from the start religion is the practice of approaching god as person and this actually this this picture here is my father it's one of the it's one of the last pictures taken of my father oh that's nice he was at a church he was at a church retreat and he was so enjoying the worship at that at that conference and and one of his friends saw him just wrapped in it and took that picture of it of him because his face was just a glow my sister my older sister was a background too yeah well my older sister then who was both a photographer and an artist then put the background in oh that's wonderful and that's a background that she painted and then put the verse in and and so you know religion and of course you've never gone here but religion is the practice of approaching god as a person the theology and the doctrine doctrine approach is approaching god with the spirit of geometry mode and that's that's very appropriate in terms of and i think and you know when i think the the dawn of this of the scientific age as you've noted before often it were pat was pastors and and monks i mean these are the people that are they're searching for god with the spirit of geometry in order to know him and love him more and so science approaches god in this way too and christians ought to in my opinion be you know as as eager and as enthusiastic about science as as anyone and and then as a pastor talking so now with the meaning crisis and the jordan peterson stuff and all of these new people one of the most difficult things for many of the people who are sort of trying to feel their way through this thing one of the most difficult things that they have to deal with is well you're in this room and you're singing songs to like where and then you close your eyes and you pray and you all this crazy stuff and i completely understand how just weird and nuts and awkward all of that stuff looks but in many ways worship is and liturgy and all of that is approaching god with the spirit of finesse and that we're we're reaching towards him with the only means and the best means that we as human beings have towards the project okay so this is very rich and very interesting so i have sort of multiple things to say about that if that's okay sure so first of all one thing i have been critical of the move which i i think see coming after um aquinas um maybe maybe aakim is a good representation of separating theology from transformation so the so this is where we lost i think an important platonic idea that which i see i i see till it trying to articulate i have some criticisms of with his notion of ultimate concern but here's what i'm trying to say that we can only approach it we we only we only can approach the ultimate within a process of you know ongoing self-transcendence and transformation and and that and that was that was that was axiomatic of for theology before like if you had said you know to philo or to to to to to to die pseudodionys he wasn't pseudodionysus but you know to dionysus if you'd say to him well you can do theology but you don't have to undergo any important trends they would say what like is known by like how can you possibly conform to god without becoming more godlike what does that mean i don't understand you that is nonsensical and yet we have exactly the opposite axiom and so here's where i'd say where i'd come back to my point that you know you want the two hemispheres deeply interpenetrating i think the spirit of geometry and the spirit of finesse have to be talking together when we want to try and talk about ultimate things because that we we have to sort of exact ourselves ultimately when we are trying to come into any kind of cognitive conformity or even more so maybe existential conformity to ultimate reality so that's the first thing i would say about that now this the so i think that maybe supports your argument in some important ways now the the this is more critical at this point and i can understand given what i've said about narrative and given what i've said about other things how in many ways the and i don't want to say the concept because it's inadequate because we have been at we've been arguing that person is not just a concept it's a modal way of being yes right and so maybe there's a distinction there you can make to respond to what i'm going to say i can understand how person is a mode that is indispensable but i'm wondering if that goes the extra step which i i i said i i don't think it's at least not argumentatively warranted towards saying it's metaphysically necessary here's what here's what i mean i see well i'll use an example that i'm deeply familiar with and in which i'm also doing really odd things that people wouldn't like i'm doing the tai chi form that's as creepy and strange and weird as people closing their eyes and all that crap okay so i got sorry i didn't mean to say all that i'm sorry you know that right i know that i know that so thank you uh so so that was him now if that was him is anything it is the spirit of finesse through and through and through and not just in your head you are literally trying to become more finesse this is deeply embodied deeply participatory right and and you were trying to come into this relationship and the mode i think is maybe this is what you ultimately want to say it's not a person but maybe it's a personal mode i don't know the mode in which uh you know if i were to put it this way allow me to stretch language i'm experiencing the dao right when i when you know you know in this in this flow state what i'm doing tai chi and like through deep finesse but there's also a lot of geometry involved in doing the form too um yeah right that mode to me feels it feels like neither the term and and i think this is i mean it daoism is definitely represents the dao as impersonal and that experience doesn't strike me as personal but it doesn't strike me as impersonal if by impersonal you mean the way i relate to localized inert objects in space because that's not how i'm relating to the dao when i'm doing it right so so i guess i'm i'm trying to to to provoke you into how how committed to two things how committed are you i know you are in a christian i'm talking about within this argument okay i'm not challenging your faith i don't want to do that okay put that aside right but within this argument how committed are you to person and and and does that mean um right does that mean that you you're talking about something i don't know that that is that something that would be an appropriate uh what am i trying to say if there were never any people or sentient beings would it still be correct to say that god is a person that's what i'm trying to say well i will i will i will differentiate here um and say yes for the sake of this argument my main i'll just rearrange now here but my main for the sake of this argument you'll notice that i put god in quotation scare quotes in totally and totally and for the sake of the argument my my main argument is that the um from from what i know about people and persons it is it is extremely appropriate and it's extremely appropriate it's fruitful and i don't want to use the word natural but i can't think of a better way to to to to approach it's easy to internalize as second nature how about that right that's right that's right now that i'm drawing short here of a metaphysical claim right whereas i see part of my this is going to probably get me in trouble too i'm sorry i i so in all so you know and and i very much appreciate a number of times that you've made comments about we have to be honest you know and and so as a christian minister you can you can look at some christians and think you know oh uh i wonder if they'd be better off if they weren't christian and then you look and and and you you meet um you know you meet atheists non-theists and you can have all church terminology uh unbelievers people far from god and stuff for for whom you certainly see life and now for me now we'll get into a little bit of the weeds of my own particular tradition part of the reason i remain a calvinist even and at some point we might want to talk about your treatment of luther which i thought was i thought actually you're talking a little bit more about calvin than luther but we could get into that someday okay but part of part of what my calvinism affords me is a a disconnection from the sort of very useful but simplistic reading of others by their propositional truth statements right right right in that in calvinism you know deep and deeply important questions of particip of of modes of participation in the age to come are all in god's hands and not ours and and there are certainly some terrifying things about that but there are also some splendid there are also some splendid advantages to it in that it gives us a certain freedom of relating to one another where um you know i after some of my initial videos and i did some initial conversations with some non-christian people i got some letters from people that were saying you failed to present the gospel to them in other words there was a certain script i was supposed to read and and use whatever manipulation i could so that at the end of it they would say you know now repeat another script i've always thought that well people don't work this way and surely god you know i would suspect deeply anybody who converted in that way under those circumstances that's right even though i've seen people who have done so and lived remarkably fruitful lives it might not be connected with the circuit you know anyway so this is complicated so the the mode of this argument is that it is it is in fact and this is why i say i'm not trying to make a huge argument here it is an argument for the reality of god and i could put scare quotes about that god and i and when i watch what jordan is doing and why he's getting the response he's getting from all kinds of men wanting to go to church after listening to jordan because in some ways you listen to what jordan is saying you say huh then you watch this response and you say huh yeah and and then your meaning crisis stuff sort of framed it all for him i was like oh well that's helpful yeah i i think a big part of jordan's success is exactly that he and again it's not totally what he said it's also the the role he assumed i i think yes people felt that as a as a response to the meaning crisis i'm sorry i've become very critical of jordan more recently for me when he went to liberty that that uh that struck me as as as uh very very problematic maybe we could talk about that sometimes so that if you get it or i'm just announcing that because if you're getting any hesitancy in my face when you're talking about jordan that's what that's what's going on there that blew my mind when he went to liberty on both ends of the equation i'm like well that's interesting wow that's a good that's a good word for it and you're perhaps kinder and i'm not criticizing jordan as a like as a total person jordan we have a lot of overlapping things and jordan has been supportive of my work i find it i cannot i can i'm not capable of your charity perhaps i cannot find a charitable interpretation of a union going to the bastion of literalism and fundamentalism whatever else young was he was a consistent and deep and profound critic of literalism and fundamentalism and he attributed a lot of suffering and pathology to literalism and fundamentalism and that's how i just can't i don't understand how those pieces go together in jordan's mind that's what i'm saying i just i i have no i i don't know the depths to which he understands liberty university but anyway let's let's let's set all of that over to the side because i can talk about oh we can talk about that but i'm not going to go there but uh no sorry i didn't mean to put you i just brought it up because i like i said i i noticed my face and i was like like this and wanted people to be clear that i'm it's i'm not responding to you i'm responding to this that's going on inside my head just to be clear okay my point is that you know for many people who are trying to work on these things they they why they find out they wind up in a christian church and they're like well isn't it isn't it weird to be worshiping but also the point that so i've listened to a number of debates about you know intelligent design versus evolution and theism and non-theism and i listen to people so often i hear really they're they're they're really debating they're really debating something to the degree like is the end open or closed is there intentionality built into these systems or i would say is the effect more than the cause or the cause more than the effect right i think they're also i think that's also part of what they're debating i agree i and i think i mean one of the things that's attracted to me about your thinking is i see you similarly at least in a convergent manner trying to get at what i call this grammar this cognitive cultural grammar that's that's underneath a lot of this this dialogue and debate and diatribe sometimes too right and so yeah i think i think that's right i think very often the superstructure is is just doing proxy duty for this these underlying things that it might be better if we were more honest and more vulnerable and this is why i like things like the authentic relating practices and the circling the stuff i did with guy right if we were more honest at getting down to that deeper level and then once we're at that level honestly then in from that position of intelligible perhaps even intelligent vulnerability talking to each other from there i think i think i i see you doing that and i think that's a really fundamentally good thing well and and then when it comes to okay now we're now okay so metaphysics i say well i i sort of suspect and now i'm a formed person just like anyone else i sort of suspect that there is in fact a a mind a a god behind this universe bringing this all forward into via christianity a i would say ala alvin someone like alvin plantenga the you know the best possible conclusion that we might imagine for a project that god has in mind and that's a very happy thought and yeah maybe i'm bullshitting myself um but if i'm going to bullshit myself about something that's not a bad thing to bullshit myself about especially if it makes see see and then this is where it kind of gets an alvin plantigas also from my same tradition calvin college oh he is i didn't know that i mean i've read planting uh um uh and uh i didn't know that his younger brother was a professor and mentor of mine at that calvin seminary neil um and it's remarkable family the plantiga family but but you know the the beauty the beauty that i see is and is it you know affords me not only an optimism about not only affords me meaning it affords me an optimism about the story of the world hopefully not in a polyannish sort of way not that we takes away any responsibility from us in terms of our responsibility in the world but but also makes you know encourages me to to believe that well encourages me to do as my master says which is love your neighbor as yourself all the way up to and including your enemy sure which um you know and then figuring out well what exactly does that look like in day to day interactions well that's you know tremendously complicated but and so and then and then you say well i'm i'm a little i'm a little i'm a little skeptical or more than a little skeptical about i wasn't going to say that just then i was going to say um i think i mentioned this before that um one of my grad students and collaborators jimson kim has uh provided you know some good initial evidence that path immersion and try to try to hear all the perspectival participatory transformative aspiration of that is really conducive to cultivating wisdom so that people that are in a path right then to cultivate wisdom better than people that don't so but but here but here's again where again you might jump off so um but the the people immersed in buddhism and christianity and islam sort of do do all do equally better than the atheists but they all do equally better too right and so that's an important thing and again to be honest that right um and so that's again where i sort of that's where i try my way of trying to answer that and again i'm not i'm not trying to push you into anything i'm really not right that's where i make the distinction between you know what's what's psychologically maybe even culturally indispensable for people and then what is sort of what is what is like something like a contian transcendental what is right what what is you know there's there's levels of indispensability then there's also indispensability just from being a human being and a cognitive agent so i think notions of relevance you know how relevant i think relevance is transcendentally indispensable to us but so there's two levels of indispensability and and maybe maybe so i'm whispering this because i'm not confident in it but maybe religion has those two levels talk to each other a lot and that's important and that but i would all as a as the person i am and the thinker i am i would still hold all of those and i'm not dismissing i would hold them as distinct from any metaphysical necessity claims and so that's that's sort of where and then i came to sort of a similar position with jp right or as i said you know in the end i don't have some of the intuitions you have what i will acknowledge is that you've got good argumentation that makes around those intuitions that i think i can point to many people you know regarded as intellectually respectable precisely because the way in which those propositions are being held doesn't lead to a lot of for lack of a better term stupidity that i find in both the theist and the anti-theist discourses that are around and so that's why i found the discussions with him and with you i find them very well and with jonathan i mean at some point jonathan and i need to have another extended he sent me a long email or oh i like this and i did this i criticized him and i wrote him back i don't want to keep doing that it would also be great we got to make this happen paul we got to have all three of us talking at some point or maybe all four of us including sivella you know in that might be a very valuable thing both from the take she has because she's sort of in between my position and your position i think i don't think she would object to me saying that and also and and i mean this in a supportive fashion i don't want people jumping on me it would be very good to have a woman's voice more in this conversation and and and and the voice she brings to this i think is sensitive and insightful and honest my gosh she's such an honest woman right and and that's so important yes so i agree 100 yeah i talked to jonathan about it he said i gotta catch up with him though so he was like i'm 12 and he's like i gotta catch up so oh it is email he said he's caught he has caught up i think so carving yeah i guess so and so yeah he said he was listening to me uh just auditory i gotta remember that i especially when i do the next series so often i forget that some people are just listening and i'm just pointing to things i've got to i've got to be better about that you gotta remember it's tough because i i think there is real value though in the visual and so yeah and it's hard to translate everything into the visual especially when i'm under serious time constraints it's very hard so i want to give you i want to give you how you want to wrap things up and what what you want to do towards you know i i at some point too i mean i i really like that you're reading a book by josiah royce joseph there's a book by there's a also there's a book on royce um it's called uh it's by dwayne tungstall i haven't started yet but i picked it up because it's so interesting it's a it's encountering joy soya royce's ethical religious insight and it's it's it's the idea it's the idea of personhood as the as the uh as the core ontological category from which you try to build your ontology that's what royce was trying to do interesting i don't know anything about him yeah so that's uh the insight uh the distance from the back cover the insight became the basis for an idealistic personalism idealism i have problems with but i thought the personalism wherein the real is the personal and a metaphysics of community is the most appropriate approach to metaphysics for personal beings especially and as an often impersonal and technological intellectual climate so that's what this person argues josei royce is trying to do and i thought again that might be relevant to you yeah so and and at some point too i'd love to have a conversation with you because i am a practitioner about because i've got a lot of thoughts about okay how how will how can you take i understand you're putting together practice i mean all of these things finally the the proof is in the pudding can how will real people begin to address the meaning crisis in their lives and i do talk about that in the series and i'm doing a lot of work on that and not just theoretically i'm trying to put together communities i'm trying to participate in them i'm trying to understand um how how i tried to talk about this in the recent question and answer like what does it really mean to talk about in ecology of practice what does that go some of the videos so in addition to the after socrates a series that i'm working on right now i i'm going to be releasing for lack of a better word instructional videos on you know what is it how it is to practice these things at least how do i see it and how do others see it so um yeah i i take that i take that point is really important really central anyways paul i will talk to you as often as you would like i i find these conversations immensely enjoyable and i like i mean this as a compliment it's like going to a dojo i feel that the workout is i both enjoy it in in in in in in the process but i also feel beneficial the benefits after having had the discussion well thank you i feel i've never been to a dojo but i feel um i i also feel like i've you know i had a like i've i've had some working out because you've i mean you obviously bring other things to this and that's you know i like the part when you were talking to jp about i mean in many ways we're all smarter together and if we can much very much manage to communicate and i mean it's a phenomenal thing that we get anything done at all it's phyla sofia phyla working together a brotherhood right yes that's right that's right right and and it's and it's and this is a point that playdo makes one of the biggest ways we bullshit ourselves is we pretend we're doing phyla sophia when we're actually perduce pursuing phyla nikea we're pursuing victory yes yes yes so we got to bring back both the phyla and the sophia yes very much absolutely absolutely so um you know we've been going at this almost two and a half hours but it's we're gonna kill your audience no no not my audience longer the when i put out a short video i get letters of complaints what's this 20 minute stuff drive right okay so thank you so much i'll just end the recording now and thank you paul thank you very much