https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=pNopyy9904E

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to do a short video on why I'm skeptical of progressivist rationale, rational morality. I assume in the Jordan Peterson Sam Harris conversation, they're gonna go around and around about this. The myth of rational morality is, and I mentioned this in my previous video, that somehow morality is based on facts and and it's the kind of thing, certainly more complex, but it's the kind of thing such as the fact that we can find that water freezes at 32 degrees. It's just more complex, more complicated, but it will be that universal. Such morality would be universal. There's no waivers for cultures. What's wrong is always wrong. So, genital mutilation, male or female, always wrong. Such a morality would be timeless. There's no appealing to, well, it's 2018 and I still can't believe blah blah blah blah blah. Such a morality would be wrong just as often as water freezing or other elements like the laws of physics, as Matt Dillahunty calls them. Now, almost always when someone makes an appeal for a progressivist, often, at least slightly, they're not going to say progressivist, but it's implied in their entire conversation and they let it slip every now and then, usually when they appeal to the year and they appeal to, let's say, dogma that can't be changed. We don't want dogma because we want to be able to change it. And of course, the assumption is that every time we change it, we're going to improve it. Well, I'm not sure we do that. But usually they immediately imply the subtraction story. I've spoken about this. I haven't spoken about this recently in some of my videos, but the subtraction story basically goes like this. Once upon a time there were people who believed in supernatural things. Now we know better. Those people had books and ideas and taught wrong things, especially in their stories. Now reason tells us that it was wrong. Oops, my slide was wrong. Well, and slavery is almost always what's brought up. Now, there's a fun book that I read a number of years ago called Debt, The First 5000 Years, and it really was a great read. One of the things that I found in that book was quite surprising, because they noted that the idea of debt and slavery have been pretty closely tied for a very, very long time. Almost inseparably so, and of course debt is tied to money. So one might ask if our political and legal ideas really are founded on the logic of slavery, then how did we ever eliminate slavery? Of course, a cynic might argue that we haven't. We've just relabeled it. The cynic would have a point. An ancient Greek would certainly have seen the distinction between a slave and an indebted wage laborer as at best a legalistic nicety. Still, even the elimination of formal chattel slavery has to be considered a remarkable achievement, and it is worthwhile to wonder how it was accomplished, especially since it was not just accomplished once. And this is something, pausing from the book, and this is something that I often hear implied in these conversations. That slavery was the norm. Slavery was universal until lo and behold in England it was abolished, and then in America it was abolished, and then people will often imply that it was secular people that were at the forefront of that, and then people go back and say no, not really because the American abolitionists were Christian. Wilbur Wilberforce was very much a Christian, so what particular secular justification do we have on the abolition of slavery now? It's also true that they were Christians on both sides of this, and what we're going to see is that this battle over slavery has gone back and forth with Christians on both sides, but also with non-Christians on both sides, but almost always, because almost everyone was religious to one degree or enough, religious people on both sides. The truly remarkable thing, if one consults the historical record, is that slavery has been eliminated or effectively eliminated many times in human history. It wasn't just the 19th century, oh progressivists. In Europe, for example, the institution largely vanished in the centuries following the collapse of the Roman Empire, an historical achievement rarely recognized by those of us used to referring to these events as the beginning of the dark ages. No one is quite sure how it happened. Most agree that the spread of Christianity must have something to do with it, but that can't have been the direct cause since the church itself was never explicitly opposed to the institution and in many cases defended it. Instead, the abolition appears to have happened despite the attitudes of both the intellectuals and the political authorities of the time. And again, if you go back and read history, you know, the really smart people are not always the good ones, boys and girls. The people who know science are not always religious or anti-religious. History is far more complex than that. Back to reading. Yet, it did happen and it had lasting effects. On the popular level, slavery remained so universally detestable that even a thousand years later, when European merchants started trying to revive the trade, they discovered that their compatriots would not countenance slaveholding in their own countries. One reason why planters were eventually obliged to acquire their slaves in Africa and set up plantations in the new world. It was one of the great ironies of history. We should pause here. A lot of that had to do with, again, if you read 1493, had to do with malaria. The Europeans who went down to Virginia and tried to be farmers of tobacco and later cotton were dying off in droves because of malaria. Malaria also wiped out the indigenous population. So, African slaves who had immunity to malaria were brought over. Well, where did they get these African slaves? Were they white slave, white racist slave traders running through the woods? I'm sure there were some of them, but many of these African slaves had lost in intertribal warfare and been sold. I'll often ask people, imagine if you will, aliens set up shop here and offer a price of a million US dollars per person that you kidnap and sell them as a slave. Do you think the slave trade would revive? I bet it would. Do you think a lot of our moral scrupers, religious or rational, would go the other way? You can debate that. It was one of the great ironies of history that modern racism, probably the single greatest evil of our last two centuries, had been invented largely because Europeans continued to refuse to listen to the arguments of the intellectuals and the jurists and did not accept that anyone they believed to be full and equal human beings could ever be justifiably enslaved. And so what you tend to find in history is that people are doing a lot of justifying one way or another based on religion, based on non-religion, based on all kinds of things to either say yes or no to slavery. And again, slaves, as the book 1493 points out, slaves were really, African slaves were really a bad bet. Indentured servants, if they could have survived malaria, would have been a far better bet, which is again why you had the predominance of slavery in the southern part of the United States, where it was beneficial to have the West African immunity to malaria. That's why slavery happened there and slavery wasn't anywhere near the institutional force in the north where you had indentured servants and where you had wage laborers going on in the north. Generally speaking, human beings make bad slaves and pets. Why? We're too smart. We resist oppression. We want things our way. And so therefore slavery has a high cost about it. And of course, as many of you know, the founding fathers imagined that slavery was just going to disappear because it seemed like the institution was nearing its end. But then of course, and I may be wrong with this, put the comments in the comment section with the invention of the cotton gin, slavery received a new boost. What's more, the demise of ancient slavery was not limited to Europe. Remarkably, around the same time in the centuries, around 600 AD, we find almost exactly the same thing happening in Indian China. I don't know where all those secularists came from in 600 AD in India and China, where over the course of centuries, amidst much unrest and confusion, chattel slavery largely ceased to exist. What all this suggests is that moments of historical opportunity, moments when meaningful change is possible, follow a distinct, even a cyclical pattern, one that has been far more coordinated across geographical space than we would have ever imagined. There is a shape to the past and it is only by understanding it that we can begin to have a sense of the historical opportunities that exist in the present. Now, this isn't a very in-depth look at the end of slavery throughout history and around the world. And this is by no means a conservative book. This is, you know, if you read that middle paragraph, it seems fairly progressivistic, fairly probably suitably in concert with what would be taught in a university now. But this idea that, oh, we just, secularism arose and we abolish slavery, just doesn't hold up to the facts. Now, what we're dealing with here is really a form of progressivism and it's as if morality tells time or keeps an eye on the calendar. And I would say it very much doesn't. The assumption is, again, and this I think is for the most part, I would call it a religious assumption. And in fact, in many ways, it gets a lot of its history from the New Testament and even from Islam, you might imagine, because keep the habit of tacking new books at the end of the Hebrew scriptures has been a reliable way to gain adherence. The Christians did it. I don't know, that's a complicated history that I know something about it. The Muslims did it. The Mormons do it. And people keep working that thing all the time. There is a progressivism that gets going, especially in Christianity, that tends to move through many other movements that follow it. The question is, what is progressivism? Why do we imagine things are going to get better? Why do we imagine people are going to get more moral as time goes further? I would suggest that this is probably not a good bet. We also tend to be a little bit selective because they're the progressivist children we don't like to talk about today, one of which is, of course, eugenics. If you read almost anything written at the end of the 19th and early 20th century, you'll get a whiff of not only certain racists, but a lot of eugenicist thought. I mentioned in my last video, the Oneida community, again, read that book. Fascinating book on their ideas of how they were breeding the master race up there in upstate New York, very much by controlling reproduction. Scientific and rational opposed to the likes of religionists like William Jennings Bryant, the famous Scopes trial. Why was William Jennings Bryant so passionate about defeating Darwinism? Well, he was very passionate against social Darwinism, and social Darwinism, even me saying it today, is a naughty word. Well, I'll tell you, in the 19th and early 20th century, that was in fashion. What put it out of fashion? Adolf Hitler. How about prohibition? I'll tell you, as Jordan Peterson mentions in, I forget which video, he talks about the link between alcohol and domestic violence, the link between alcohol and college rape. If you want to talk about rational, rationality, well, about the most rational thing we can do to improve society will be the elimination of alcohol. Well, how did that go? Well, it didn't go well at all. And in fact, to bring it forward today, people will say, well, you're a religious crazy person. What always strikes me about that is there's nothing prohibitionistic in the Bible at all, contrary to what a lot of Methodists and these groups that moved through prohibition realize. Well, why? Because people see the negative effects of alcohol, and well, this isn't in the Bible. So you might say, well, there's not clear, there's not a clear abolition of slavery in the Bible. And I'd say, oh, there's certainly not a clear abolition of alcohol. In fact, read the Book of Proverbs. You're basically pouring it down the poor people's mouths so they can survive their misery. We're terribly conflicted, in fact, in terms of the last generation's rationality. Why, when I go into Costco, is it natural, all natural, organic, organic, organic, not made in a factory? Well, these are all the buzzwords of marketing. Why? Well, because we came to believe that Twinkies weren't the most evolved food source we've ever known. We don't even know what to eat as human beings. In just the last 10 or 15 years alone, now I go to the doctor and the doctor tells me something very different from what the doctor told me 10 years ago. And it's like, oh, yeah, this is all based on science. And is this like astrophysics where we're trying to see if there's life on frozen moons going around Jupiter? No, this is study of the human body. We don't have seven or eight billion of us. We don't have hundreds of years of studying this. We don't even know what to eat. Rationality is going to make all this clear. Well, when people go to Costco, I think they throw that rationality out the window and they all become religionists and paleo people because, well, I want to eat, well, I'm going to eat the paleo diet. I want to eat what the caveman ate. Okay, well, you're going to believe what the caveman believed too? He apparently knew what to eat. We have a sinking sense that concessive waves of colonization are killing the systems we're dependent upon. Well, rationality colonizes nature. We have put nature on a leash and now we're trying to figure out if that leash we put nature on is killing us as we slowly strangle nature. Now, how's rationality doing with the next wave? Well, I suppose rationality should clearly answer all of the questions we have about transgenderism. It should clearly answer all the questions we have about the gender binary. It should clearly answer all the questions we have about racism because surely all of these problems come from religion. Perhaps the end of monogamy. Well, listen to Brett Weinstein's video on monogamy. It doesn't look like rationality is clearing this up. Can we learn some things? Absolutely. But is rationality progressing, is progressing us through these things based on facts? Is it somehow clearing everything up? Are all these fights between religious people and rational people? It doesn't appear that way to me. Plenty of atheists around 70 years ago said uniformly, well same-sex marriage 70 years ago, were all the atheists and there were plenty of them, were all of them saying gay people have the right to be married. Is that what they were saying? Or maybe they were post-monogamy. I don't know. I haven't seen a lot of uniformity on this. Now someone can come back and say religion hasn't had a lot of uniformity. Yeah, but the point you're promoting is that based on the facts, we can figure out a universal transcultural rationality just like human bodies are universal transcultural. It should be as universal and transcultural as water freezing at 32 degrees. So might I propose that 200 years from now perhaps we'll have a revolution in rational human reproduction. We've been certainly trying this for a little while. The Oneida community practiced it. They didn't use a lot of highfalutin technology. It was just you and you can have babies. Go for it. You and you can have babies. Go for it. Brave New World had a nice big factory in which alpha, beta, gammas, deltas, and epsilons were all bred. And you know what? What was wonderful there is that they could breed stupid people who enjoyed being stupid. And they bred elite people who could enjoy being elite. And they made sure that everyone had sex. No sticky sex now. Everybody can have sex. Just don't get too attached to your partners because if someone says I want to have sex with you, you say yes. But now let's get to the root of this. Why don't we instead of trying to eliminate religion for which there's really we have no real powerful biological means of doing so, let's get rid of visual sexual attraction. The objectification of women is attached to that. Unwise marriage selection, irrational marriage selection is attached to that. How many people are out there picking mates because they're hot? They should be picking mates because they have superior biology. And well maybe the symmetry of my face and the luscious locks of my hair demonstrate my superior procreative abilities. I have had five children. But why don't we just get rid of visual sexual attraction completely? Maybe rape will go away. We'll certainly get rid of unwanted sexual attention that women have had to suffer through for years. This should probably put a kibosh on the Me Too movement. If you look at Harvey Weinstein, well was he betting ugly women? No, he was betting hot women. What if Harvey Weinstein just saw women for their what personalities, intelligence? Actually he'd probably use them for whatever quality he thought he could capitalize, but he probably wouldn't use sex. You know the truth is we have a way of curbing male visual sexual attraction. In fact, curbing all male sexual attraction. Let's take sexual procreation away from men. We're halfway there now with reliable birth control. Let's go all the way and just allow certain men to breed under certain circumstances. And well that's a lot easier to do than making people religion free. We have no idea how we could make people religion free. We have a very clear idea and it's been used for for thousands of years how to make men procreation free. Well selection for reproduction can be done rationally. Surely rationality can tell us the optimal qualities of human beings better than this soup of human subjectivity or even the sexual marketplace. Who would imagine leaving such a thing up to nature? Will, well let's talk about fuel, petroleum based fuel. Will car owners and airplane riders today be considered like slave owners and whalers 200 years from now? Will we be talking about all those silly rationalists 200 years from now? 200 years from now what cherished values of ours will be considered barbarisms? Can rationality tell us? Religion, it's a long conversation and there's an established vocabulary that helps people at different times maintain that conversation. If you ask me what theology is, that's exactly what theology is. It's having a conversation with Augustus and the apostle Paul and Aquinas and John Calvin and Martin Luther and if you believe Jordan Peterson we're going to look back even further we're going to talk about hierarchies. The difficulty we have in transcending our assassin robot is that we really don't have the straight stick to decide what is better or worse now. Now when can we and some things say that's better or that's worse? But again wouldn't it be better to make the vast majority of males procreation free? Let's make eunuchs of us all and leave reproduction up to a scientific rational basis. Oh we can continue to tinker with it. We'll build one generation and they'll say oh we didn't have enough boys or we didn't have enough girls or we didn't have enough alphas or we didn't have enough betas. We'll figure out a rational approach to procreation, neuter the vast majority of men, we'll leave women alone, you know well maybe we can help women get off this you know sexual drive thing too and we'll all be perfectly rational. Religion is skeptical about this so what religion offers is a long conversation with an established vocabulary so that we can have relationships with our ancestors and hopefully learn from them and obviously I'm framing this as something that might appeal to someone for whom God is a very scary person. There's even the promise of more. So there's a little short video I hope.