https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Q6YiIJWRN7c

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. There's a chance I might have jury duty tomorrow, which will be Friday. And so I have to do this a little earlier, so as always, my disclaimer, it might be rough. If you want to see the final draft, you'll have to go to the church channel because that's where that gets posted on the Sunday live stream. Last week we looked at how Jesus disrupts the culture war and we talked about the Judean culture war and we've been talking about this on and off for a number of weeks. One of the real questions that one might ask is what were Jesus' disciples after? We talked about the fact that Peter was not looking just for a better fish finder and I think probably the most obvious passage that reveals what the disciples were about is in Acts 1. This is after the crucifixion, after the resurrection. They gathered around him and asked him, Lord, are you at this time going to restore the kingdom to Israel? Well, what were they asking for? Well, they want the kingdom to be restored to Israel. Well, as in David and Solomon. If you read the Hebrew scriptures, you'll see there's all sorts of prophecies about Israel being elevated among the nations and her people coming back from exile. This is pretty much the definition of God's chosen people. If God is the God over the world, then God's chosen people will reign over the world. Now Jesus' answer to this is interesting. He answers, he said to them, it is not for you to know the times or the dates the Father has set by his own authority, but you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and in Judea and Samaria and to the ends of the earth. So Jesus' disciples, even after the crucifixion and resurrection, understood Jesus' ministry in terms of national fulfillment. Now Jesus, in fact, did win the culture war, but how and when and through whom? And this matrix that I have on the screen in front of you, this doesn't last when we get into the Pauline epistles and the Joannine epistles and as church history really starts to take off in the context of the entire empire, you can see that in many ways Jesus completely transcends this culture war, which while he is walking around seems to have, seems to be gripping everyone and completely trying to dominate what everybody thinks and how everybody acts. When did Jesus win the culture war? Well, one could say that when Constantine had his vision and his conquest at the Milvian Bridge and you might say, well that seems a long ways from Jesus preaching in Nazareth and Jesus healing in Capernaum and Jesus overturning the money changers in the temple. And this seems just so utterly banal and imperial. Why would you look at Constantine in such a light? Now for a very long time in church history, that's exactly what this looked like. Since the Protestant Reformation, there's been more skepticism about it and in many ways Constantine is sort of cast as a villain that the church was wonderful and great as long as it didn't have any power but then after Constantine everything was a mess and then you'll find a whole variety of Christian traditions sort of part ways on this question. Now the ambiguities reveal it was a partial conquest and that's pretty much the kinds of conquests that we have in this age. A very interesting book is Peter Brown's Through the Eye of a Needle where he talks about wealth, the fall of Rome and the making of Christianity in the West from 330 to 530 AD. Now in terms of the geopolitical transition, it's at least recognizable that Jesus conquered Rome. But in a far more global terms, what were the disciples looking for? They really much more would have rather that, well, one of them like Judas Maccabees be conquering Roman armies and not have a pagan like Constantine doing it. And in what sense is Jesus ruling the world through Constantine? Now again, this sort of has a wheat and tares or weeds and a wheat sense to it that you could say, well, Jesus sort of is conquering the world but Constantine at the head of an army isn't the sort of conquest I was looking for. But then again, you have all these strange images in the book of Revelation. Now Constantine approached it in some ways like any pagan king would. You find the right God to afford dominion and you make sure that the priests and everyone have their act together and part of what happened with those councils is Constantine is trying to ensure that they're doing things the right way so all these Christians can't seem to a whole bunch of things so let's get them all together and get the story straight. Now is that improvement? Is that corruption? And suddenly all these little takes on this from a whole variety of different traditions within church history sort of gets scrambled. But back to my main point, whereas in the first century AD, the idea that a Roman empire and a Roman emperor and the entire empire in some ways would be bending its knee to Jesus Christ seemed absolutely ludicrous even though at the end of the first century in the book of Revelation with John's letters to the seven churches, it's kind of what he's saying is going to happen. It's a really amazing bit of prophecy. Now what does it mean to be God's chosen people if it doesn't mean you'll wind up on top? The messianic anticipation from the Hebrew prophets was that they would rule the world through a promised Messiah and in some ways the Maccabees throwing off the yoke of Greek hegemony were sort of what they were looking for and so Jesus doesn't seem to be working in this way. They imagined this would happen by the normal means that people ruled in their day sort of like they saw David and Solomon rule. And this is pretty normal for an ancient Near East hegemony. All the emperors and empires ruled that way and if that's the template that you have then well that's surely what should happen. And what we begin to see is that Jesus really changes this narrative. Now we're going to read from Luke 7 today and if you've been following along you'll notice a number of weeks ago we were in Luke 4 then we were in Luke 5 and the last week we were in Luke 6. Now Luke 6 verse 17 to the end of the chapter is the Sermon on the Plain. Now that's sort of like the Sermon on the Mount has some common elements to the Sermon on the Mount. It's significantly shorter but sort of functions similar to Matthew's Sermon on the Mount. And then we get into Luke 7 with these stories. When Jesus had finished saying all this to the people who were listening he entered Capernaum and we've been there before. Jesus has been in and out of Capernaum. It's been his home and his base for a lot of this early Galilean ministry. There's a centurion servant who his master valued highly was sick and about to die. Now this is a centurion. This is a Roman. This is the soldier in charge of applying Roman power and Roman authority over this region. This is the guy in charge of the occupation. He is undoubtedly a pagan Gentile. But as we're going to see he's also sort of a person of peace which is a phrase that comes from Luke 10 when Jesus sends out his disciples and they have to be housed by someone. Well they should be housed by someone of peace. Someone who is going to be generous to them. But right away we see sort of the nuance of this situation. Is he an oppressor? Yes. Is he hospitable, kind, good to the people that he's oppressing? Yes. Is this like a benevolent slave master? Well in fact he is a literal slave master. In a lot of ways this story harkens back to the book of 2 Kings with the story of Elisha and Naaman because Naaman again was a general in the Syrian army and had been raiding Israel and so when he came down with leprosy the Jewish slave girl says well there's a prophet in Israel. Well how does he have a Jewish slave girl? Because of raiding or buying he's a slave owner. He's an oppressor. So how are we supposed to think through these elements? The centurion heard of Jesus and sent some elders of the Jews to him asking him to come and heal his servant. When they came to Jesus they pleaded earnestly with him. This man deserves to have you do this because he loves our nation and has built our synagogue. So this is a quite exceptional centurion. As oppressors go well he's kind of a benevolent oppressor as it were. Now it's very interesting that the elders of the Jews didn't ask him to free his slaves, didn't ask him to free his servant. This man deserves to have you do this and Jesus doesn't seem to ask a lot of questions. Jesus doesn't say oh centurion go and oppress no more. It doesn't seem to come out of Jesus' mouth at all. So Jesus went to him. Now that in and of itself is an important detail. In today's status hierarchies generally speaking the inferior goes to the superior. When you go to the doctor's office you sit and wait for the doctor and the doctor's time is prioritized and you can spend a whole lot of time in the doctor's office waiting for him to show up. It shows that he's the superior and the patient is the inferior in some ways. So Jesus went with them to the centurion's house. He was not far from the house when the centurion sent friends to say to him, Lord don't trouble yourself for I do not deserve to have you come under my roof. Now the centurion is an unusual man and he is not the kind of colonialist or oppressor that is going to make all the nationals and the locals jump and bend to him. He has an understanding that there's for an observant Jew there's a potentiality of cultic contamination if Jesus goes there. And he's I'm sure very sensitive, more sensitive than we are, of these status differentials of superior and inferior. And so right away in a sense he makes himself the inferior beneath Jesus. You think, well how does that work? You're a Roman. You're a centurion. You're an occupational officer. That is why I did not even consider myself worthy to come to you. Oh, so he's aware of the status differential. And in fact he was playing into it. He considered himself so inferior to Jesus that he wouldn't dare to go. Instead he sent emissaries. But say the word and my servant will be healed. For I myself am a man under authority with soldiers under me. I tell this one go and he goes and that one come and he comes. I say to my servant do this and he does it. This man understands status. This man understands how the world works. This man has placed himself under Jesus. So far under in fact he didn't even bother to go to him because he figured himself too inferior. He also elevates Jesus to such a degree that he says you don't have to come and apply some herbal medicine or wave your hands or touch or make mud and spit and do any of this. Wow, that's like writing a letter to Benny Hinn and say I'm not worthy to come to your crusade. Just say the prayer there and I'll be healed. Actually the miracle worker wants a big show. What's not happening here? When Jesus heard this he was amazed at him and said and turning to the crowd following him he said I tell you I have not found such great faith even in Israel. This is God's chosen people the ones who had benefit of the revelation through Moses. Then the men who had been sent returned to the house and found the servant. Wow. Wow. But the story continues. Soon afterward Jesus went to a town called Nain and his disciples and a large crowd went along with him because well this is fun to watch. This is the best thing going on. As he approached the town gate a dead person was being carried out the only son of his mother and she a widow. So this is a sad case. And now you have to understand that you had to be buried pretty much right away to touch a dead person would make someone ceremonial and clean. But as they're coming into the town out is coming the funeral procession to the cemetery likely to bury him. A large crowd from the town was with her. When the Lord saw her his heart went out to her and he said don't cry. Then he went up and touched the beer. Notice he didn't touch the man. They were carrying him. They were carrying him on and the bear stood still. He said notice remember the centurion says you have only to say he doesn't touch the man he touches the beer to stop it and he he speaks. Young man I say to you get up. The dead man sat up and began to talk and Jesus gave him back to his mother. Now we have another story that is echoing Elisha and raising the widow's son from the dead. What's going on in this story. They're all filled with on praised God. A great prophet has appeared among us because they're thinking Elijah and Elisha. They said God has come to help his people. The news about Jesus sped throughout Judea and the surrounding country. Wow great stories. What are we to make of them. Now someone might look at these stories and say well I've got some butts about this. Our ills are only partially restored in this age sort of like Constantine's conquest. One kind centurion doesn't take away the fact that the Roman Empire and its occupation was oppression and he was a slave owner. Rome lived its well-beings at the expense of the nations. Rome corrupted the morals of tax tax collectors and prostitutes in order to continue to keep the Jewish people under their boot. Rome promoted a rival system to mosaic law corrupting God's people. This was basically the fuel of the Judean culture war. And it's lovely that Jesus intervened in this tragic situation in Nain but how many other widows lost their sons and where was Jesus to raise them. Wouldn't the son and his mother live to die again. Maybe this time he would bury her instead of she him but death is still doing its thing on planet earth. How much other suffering even just around Jesus went without relief. Was Jesus like Miracle Max and everyone or no one around him got a cold and everything flowers bloomed around him and well wouldn't wouldn't that be great. I mean we can just keep thinking and OK this is a good he didn't do this is a good he didn't fix this is a good he didn't correct it. Jesus maybe was a good man and well you might be skeptical about some of these things happening but he certainly didn't fix the world. Why didn't he banish suffering entirely. If he is the son of God just snap your fingers like Thanos in a reverse sort of way. What begins remember the question we asked initially maybe I should drop that slide in here. When did Jesus win the culture war. How when through whom. Well the insurer the centurion exhibited startling faith. Now again you think about this and well did he have faith before he was kind to the Jewish He built their synagogue and but it seemed to be the occasion with Jesus that everything changed. I'm not worthy he says remember Peter the disciple after Jesus has the huge catch of fish go away from me I'm a sinful man. Jesus had this effect on people that suddenly when they were around Jesus well they saw his glory but they also saw their own sin and which one would win out. Just say the word Jesus and my servant will be healed. The words Jesus said have been reverberating through the centuries these stories go on and on and on and on and still here 2000 years later we're still reading them. They get inside of us they colonize us and the reason I have the cover of this book Dominion here is because in some ways this book written by someone especially when he started did not identify as a Christian began to see how basically the subtitle how the Christian revolution remade the world and he didn't remake it as everyone else assumed like Constantine tried to remake the world. It was sort of Jesus through Constantine and was Constantine perfect by no means but you can see how Jesus is working through and things have been slowly remaking the world for 2000 years and just like with all of these stories there are plenty of ways you can say yeah but well fair enough but if you look at the world now compared to 2000 years ago Jesus has certainly changed it more than anyone else but don't we still suffer and die. Yeah why didn't Jesus words dispel death and suffering and wipe every tear like the Hebrew prophet said would happen. Well we don't suffer or die alone now. Camus words Christ the God man suffers too. Evil and death can no longer be entirely imputed to him since he suffers and dies. The night on Golgotha was so important because the divinity ostensibly abandoned its traditional privilege and lived through to the end despair included the agony of death. He changed it. He's continuing to change it. He's continuing to impact culture wars in fact I would say that in many ways our culture wars are two sides both having been changed by Jesus continuing to work through the revelation of the son of man. Where does that leave us? But why should we be satisfied with such half measures? Shouldn't we demand that everything be here and now? But is there some greater glory that God can work through suffering and not just by avoiding it. We see that with children. Do you spoil your children? Do you understand the word spoiled? What you do is you use your children learn to trust you and they learn to believe in you even as as Jesus said to other parents though you are evil how much more will your heavenly father give you good things. But bad things keep happening to Christians and again yes that's the reason for the cross. The worst thing happened to the best man and still God moves the ball forward. Can you believe that? The centurion well he just had one issue confronted by him and he exhibited the faith. The woman wasn't even didn't even have the challenge of faith. Jesus just stopped and gave it to her. The righteous shall live by faith. We don't seek suffering. We seek restoration. We practice obedience. We seek forgiveness and we practice forgiveness and we await the revelation of the Son of Man believing he is already here with us and he works through us still.