https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=G2QY84b67GM

 Hi, this is Paul and this is my Rough Draft to Sunday series where I have done a rough draft of my sermon and I'm going to talk through it and that's part of my editing process because as I talk through it I can see if I like it, see if I don't, see if I need to shorten it, see if I need to lengthen it or take out a slide or add slides or whatever I need to do to get it ready for Sunday. So I've been doing this series on the five solas and we're up to Soli Deo Gloria which is glory to God alone and in many ways this just sounds wrong. Because what about the heroic little people who strive every day to feed their families or help children or care for loved ones? Don't they deserve some glory? And what about heroes of history who have discovered great cures or relieved human suffering or won great battles? Don't they deserve glory? And why would God deny them the glory that certainly in any human terms, and it seems like good terms that they deserve. And then when you read passages like this which justify the doctrine, I am the Lord, that is my name, I will not yield my glory to another or my praise to idols. Well, it just sounds like an ego test. And we believe in equality and we believe that everybody should have a chance at glory or everybody should get glory and everybody should get the glory they deserve. That's just justice. And we've got this big fight right now, equality of opportunity versus equity or equality of outcome. And I think equality of opportunity will probably win and the reason it's going to win is because here's the thing. We say we want equality but we really want the house on the beach or the good job and to climb the corporate ladder and to get to the corner office and we want the hot spouse and the best looking girl at school or the best looking guy at school or the quarterback of the football team. We want VIP access to the celebrities that we love. We want the best foods, we want the best of everything, we want the best clothes, the best jobs, we want the best. So on one hand we say, yeah, we want equality but we know what we want. Now, the reason we want equality is because we know what we want and we because we know what we want and we know what everybody else wants and we don't want anybody getting ahead of us. So what's really driving equality are these two things which are one is selfish ambition that we want what we want and we want the good stuff and we were climbing ladders and we want to achieve the best to secure the best and we're afraid because we know that everybody else is trying it too and we don't want them to get a head start so we say, okay, even equality of opportunity and that way people don't get too ahead of us. But this is just human nature and it's been this way forever. One of the most interesting stories in the Bible comes from the book of Esther where you have King Xerxes and he's furious because Queen Vashti is rebelling against him. He was showing all of his friends, all of his wealth and all of his glory and he's like, hey, bring out the wife. She's a hottie and show them what you got babes because I'm going to take your glory and make it my own. So then he exiles her from the court but then he's grumpy because he misses her and he remembered Vashti and what she had done and then he made a decree about her. Then the king's personal attendance proposed, Let a search be made for the beautiful young virgins for the king. Let the king appoint commissioners in every province of his realm to bring all these beautiful young women into the harem at the citadel of Susa. Let them be placed under the care of Haggai, the king's eunuch who is in charge of the women and let beauty treatments be given to them. Then let the young women who please the king be queen instead of Vashti. And this appealed to the king and he followed it. Well, of course he followed it. Scour the kingdom for the best looking women and you know, you know, yeah, you know what you're going to do and try them all out and see which one pleases you. We'd all like to be king. We want to possess glory and whether it's a woman or the glory of a person or it's the glory of a painting, it's the glory of a home, it's the glory of food, it's the glory of beauty, our own, it's the glory of accomplishment. We, glory is it. Glory is what we dearly want and what we dearly desire to possess. But the problem is that there is no way to equal. You know, even if I was, you know, from the time I was young decided I wanted to be a track star and I trained and I worked hard and I did what I could and I ate right and all of this I would never be faster than Hussein Bolt. And you know, just read Jared Diamond's Guns, Germs and Steel. You know, those who lived in the Americas and came to the Americas first, they didn't stand a chance once the Europeans got there. You know, Eurasia just had all the opportunities, all the domesticated animals, the east-west axis instead of north-south. Again, Jared Diamond goes through the whole thing. History is far from equal and obviously neither is genetics, which is a function of history. And so here we are. Now, C.S. Lewis had, I think, one of the best lines about equality. Equality is good medicine but bad food. But I think, again, one of the other best works about equality is Kurt Vonnegut's Harrison Bergeron. It's a short story and if you've never read it, look it up on the internet. It's pretty easy to find. And it's the story of a world where there's, you know, the scene opens and there's this ballet being given but you can't let the dancers who have genetic, who have the best genetics or the most height or the most strength have advantage over everyone. So in this world, everyone is kept bound with weights to keep them down so that their physical size or their inherent strength or their superior eyesight or their great voice or whatever or their great intelligence. I mean, it's all hobbled by technology. So equity. Everyone is equal. And then Harrison Bergeron makes a move. I won't spoil the story for you. And it's Animal Farm. All animals are equal but some animals are more equal than others and it's always the way it is. And we hates him for it, don't we? I mean, this God who claims all glory for himself and doesn't want to share and not only does he have glory but he has choice and he has options and he has power and he has beauty and he doesn't die and he makes decisions and we're all fated to stumble around in this world and he sits in heaven and laughs at us. And he even gets jealous if we make a little image or make a little other God and like that other God better than him. Who can imagine such a tyrant? But what is glory? And how does it work? Consider a master baker. This is someone who bakes better than anyone in the world and they spend their time baking the perfect cake. Well, is glory in the cake? Where do we see glory? How do we know glory? We know glory when the baker takes the cake and gives it to people to eat. And the baker waits. Glory emerges. The baker waits. It's there in the cake but it needs an eater. And when the eater tastes the cake and they look at the cake and they look at the baker and they say, this is glorious. Now what's amazing is that how quickly glory can be diminished and all the different ways it can be diminished. Think for a moment about the one who's eating the cake, maybe another baker who eats the cake and thinks, I can't make a cake this good. And so when the master baker looks at the second rate baker tasting the cake, the second rate baker, their mind is going, I'm not going to smile. I'm not going to say anything. I don't want there to be glory. The taster can ruin the glory. Well, what about the baker? What about the master baker who is also an egotist? And all you hear from the master baker is, is it good? Is it good? I made it. I made it. And what was that cake dependent upon? Wasn't there way back in human history before we know anyone, someone along the line found that one pot of wheat that didn't explode and set the seeds around and thought for the moment, if I plant these seeds, then it won't explode. And so we have the beginning of agriculture and we have the beginning of genetically modifying without genetics, the seeds and selecting and then suddenly we have a field full of these and then these seeds work better than those seeds. And what about that first herdsman who took this animal and over time, the generations of these nameless people who took an animal and turned it into the cow and then the Hollanders and the Frisians that made the dairy cows that all the world uses and glory is just within the story and the baker depends on this nameless person who discovered the seed that did not pop and this nameless herdsman who took the animal and domesticated it and it became the descendant of the dairy cow that produces the milk for the cake and on and on and on and on and what does that master baker then claim for himself about all of the ingredients that are necessary for the perfect cake and what is required for there to be glory? Glory is spoiled so easily and here's the thing, glory corrupts our hearts. We get a little bit of it and in our parlance it goes to our heads and we become full of ourselves and we begin to look down on others who don't have such glory. Can we be trusted with glory? Now one of the great stories of this is of course Salieri who sees, he's a composer but he's no Mozart and this burns in him. He doesn't have the glory, it can't even be near him. Even being next to the glory, he deems Mozart unworthy and he wants his death and he vows to destroy him because Salieri more than most can see the glory but he can't have it, he can't do it and this useless, this person, this undeserving fool of a man has it and not Salieri. C.S. Lewis wrote a sermon that I could be Salieri for. It's the weight of glory, it's one of C.S. Lewis's best sermons and the title inspires a book of essays of his and you can find the weight of glory, the sermon on the internet in a variety of places and I could be Salieri to this because I can't preach a sermon as well as C.S. Lewis and he's an English professor and I'm a preacher and try as I might my whole life long I'll never be able to get there and I know it. Should I hate him? Is it envy? And Lewis talks in this sermon about the specific pleasure of the inferior and culturally we just want to gag. This cannot be trusted, this cannot be good, there cannot be any inferiority. Bring it on Kurt Vonnegut, wrap us with weights, blind our eyes, dull our minds, may they're not be superior because we cannot stand glory, it hurts us, it burns us. I think of Gollum in the Lord of the Rings. Glory suggests two ideas to me, this is C.S. Lewis working it out, of which one seems wicked and the other ridiculous. Either glory means to me fame or it means luminosity. As for the first, since to be famous means to be better known than any other people, the desire for fame appears to me to be a competitive passion and therefore of hell rather than heaven. As for the second, who wishes to become a kind of living electric light bulb? When I began to look into this matter I was shocked to find such different Christians as Milton, Johnson and Thomas Aquinas taking heavenly glory quite frankly in the sense of fame and good report. But not fame conferred by our fellow creatures, fame with God, approval or I might say appreciation by God. Is this in contradiction to this idea of glory to God alone? It's all over the Psalms, it's all over the Bible. And then when I had thought it over I saw that this view was scriptural, nothing can be eliminated from the parable of the divine accolade. Well done thou good and faithful servant. With that a good deal of what I had been thinking all my life fell down like a house of cards, C.S. Lewis says. I suddenly remembered that no one can enter heaven except as a child. And nothing is so obvious in a child, not in a conceited child but a good child, as its great and undisguised pleasure in being praised. And you see this with children, don't you? You see it even with very small children and you see this with teenagers and it doesn't go away with adults, we all love to be praised. But in a child, somehow a child can handle glory better than we can. Why? Not only in a child either but even in a dog or a horse. Apparently what I had mistaken for humility had all these years prevented me from understanding what is in fact the humblest, the most childlike, the most creaturely of pleasures, nay the specific pleasure of the inferior. I walk in the door of my house and my dog is happier to see me than any living creature should ever be and he's enjoying it and he's disappointed if I don't reciprocate and praise him and engage with him for it. The specific pleasure of the inferior, the pleasure of a beast before men, a child before its father, a pupil before his teacher, a creature before its creator. Now why should God enjoy goodness and godness? That should be godness not goodness. Why should God enjoy godness and keep us from it? Who or what gives God the right? I am the Lord, that is my name. I will not yield my glory to another, bore my praise to idols. But verses have chapters. Here is my servant whom I uphold, my chosen one in whom I delight. I will put my spirit on him and he will bring justice to the nation. He will bring justice to the nation's servant, the Lord's servant. He will bring justice to the nation's. Well how will he do it? Will he bring an army? Will he march through the streets? Will he take and destroy and put it down with an iron fist? He will not shout or cry out or raise his voice in the streets. A bruised reed he will not break and a smoldering wick he will not snuff out. In faithfulness he will bring forth justice. In faithfulness? How can faithfulness bring forth justice? He will not falter or be discouraged until he establishes justice on earth. In his teaching the islands will put their hope. Now the islands in Isaiah are our stand in for the nations. They are the people other than Israel. This is what the Lord, this is what God the Lord says, the creator of the heavens who stretches them out, who spreads out the earth with all that springs from it, who gives breath to its people and life to those who walk on it, who gives not just the improved seed but gives the seed itself to the farmer, who creates the sun and the land, this entire canvas upon which glory will be displayed, the stage upon which glory will take place. I the Lord have called you in righteousness. I will take hold of your hand. I will keep you and will make you to be a covenant for the people and a light for the Gentiles to open the eyes that are blind and free captives from prison and release from the dungeon those who sit in darkness. Jesus in his first sermon in Nazareth comes and declares he's going to free the captives and he's going to give sight to the blind and the glory that was meant for this world through him will no longer be retarded. It will no longer be held back. It will no longer be bound like Harrison in Kurt Vonnegut's story. It will be free, liberated. It will be glorious. But we already know we can't handle glory. I am the Lord. That is my name. I will not yield my glory to another or my praise to idols. See the former things have taken place. New things I declare. Before they spring into being, I announce them to you. What is this? Christianity says that within the trinity of the Lord, there are no more things that are equal. What is this? Christianity says that within the trinity we have one God, co-eternal, co-equal, but then the son submits to the father and the son then enjoys the specific pleasure of the inferior even though he isn't. He brings justice but not as the world does. The bruised reed he will not break. The smoldering wick he will not snuff out. He will not cry out in the streets. What does that mean? How can he bring justice in a world where there will not be equality or equity, where we can't even hold goodness or power or brilliance or glory or anything without either hating it for being so or using it against another we are not capable of holding glory. So he comes and being found in appearance as a man he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross. Therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name and so as the Christ song in Philippians 2 starts he does not consider equality something to be clung to, held onto, exploited, used to his own advantage but he invests himself in the specific pleasure of the inferior and this is the way that the world is saved and this is the way that glory, says the Gospel of John, is manifest. This is his glorification. This is glory and we look at this and say this is a man beaten, strung naked on a cross. How can this be glorious? We thought Herod was glorious. We thought Caesar was glorious. We thought we were glorious in all of our pursuits. This is glory. You see there is only one safe address to locate your glory and that's why we give glory to God alone. No human can finally handle glory. If we have it we use it against others. If we don't have it we desire it and it causes us to hate. We can't handle glory so any glory that we have we should give to God because he is the only safe place to locate our glory and you say but that isn't right. That isn't just. You see glory twists our heart towards possessing it, towards preserving it and our possession of it, towards robbing it for others. It's like Tolkien's ring and yet in the year that King Uzziah died I saw the Lord high and exalted, seated on a throne and the train of his robe filled the temple. Above him were seraphim and each with six wings. With two wings they covered their face. Even God is a lot to take for the angels, for even the angels. With two wings they covered their feet and with two they were flying and they were calling to one another, holy, holy, holy is the Lord Almighty. The whole earth is full of his glory. So how can this be? Why do you say God is the only safe place to locate our glory? Why should we always be giving our glory to him? What does he do with the glory? He does what he always does. He gives it to us freely. People often say why is God hidden? Why won't he show himself? Because God is on one hand the most glorious and his beauty would crush us, but on the other hand he's the most humble and he gives his glory and doesn't even show up to take a bow. So what does he wait for us to do? To worship, to say thanks, to reciprocate. It's the Father and the Son in the Trinity. It's the dance of creation where we give our glory to God and he showers glory upon the earth indiscriminately. The poor child who grows up in the village has glory. The wealthy person who grows up in the fine neighborhood has glory. Glory is spread indiscriminately. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty. The whole earth is full of his glory. And so we wait for the day where we finally understand what to do with glory. We give it to God and he blesses us even when we don't deserve it. Well, where can we find such a story? On the night he was betrayed he took bread and breaking it after giving thanks he broke it and said this is my body given for you. Do this in remembrance of me. And when he does this he shows us his glory. The glory, the glory, the specific glory of the inferior which then is exalted and round and round and round we go. So take the bread, come and worship, receive the glory, give it to him and let him keep giving it back as he always has. Amen.