https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=SuRl-smHdSc

 All right, Nick, we've talked a little bit on email, but why don't we begin by, why don't you just tell me a little bit about yourself? Yeah, well, thank you, first of all, for having me. I know you're very busy and in great demand. So it's a real treat for me to spend a little time with you. I was born in 1943 in a very small village in the Netherlands. And so I'm a bit older than you. In fact, I was thinking our oldest daughter is your age. And so that kind of places me. And yeah, maybe, you know, we'd like to talk about same sex attraction and those issues, but it might be useful to just give a very brief overview of my roots and my family situation. So I was born into a Christian home, which I'm very grateful for. I think life is a gift. In a small community, religion was prime. In the Netherlands or in Canada? That was in the Netherlands. OK. Up until age 12, I was in the Netherlands. So you were born during the Second World War? Yes. OK. In a small rural, agriculturally based village. So yeah, so my dad was a baker. He worked for a bakery. He was a member of and very active in the Christian labor union. He was a member of and very active in the Christian political party. We subscribe to a Christian daily newspaper. And if we had had radio or television, it would have been a Christian station. And we attended school with the Bible. And of course, we went to church twice every Sunday. And what I'm trying to say is that that particular community at that time, life was religion. Life is religion. They really believed that. They practiced that. And of course, that came from the great Abraham Cuyper. And that was his legacy. That one way of summarizing that view would be to say that for us, the end of life is not heaven. The end of life is to bring the life of heaven to earth. And that was very much part of my upbringing. I'm named after my maternal grandfather, who had a bit of fame as a young man. He walked with a wheelbarrow from our place to Amsterdam, about 30 kilometers one way, in order to purchase study books, Cuyper and Boving. And these were unschooled people, agricultural workers, day laborers. But they were not, for that reason, uneducated. And they would read and study this. Right. And so anyway, those are my roots. That's where I came from. And that's still part of me. So when I was 12, we came to Canada, our family. There were five in the family. Two stayed in Holland. The oldest two children stayed in Holland. And the youngest two, my younger brother, Jack, and I were enrolled in the John Calvin Christian School, Vancouver. And, you know, that was... There was no questions about that. That's where we belonged. And that's where I went to school. So soon our father died. Our dad died at age 51, cancer, within four years of coming to Canada. And he called his children around his bed. And one of the time that he called Jack and me together, we were the youngest. And he talked to us. And I've forgotten everything he said, except this. He said, boys, don't think God needs me to look after you. He will do that. And I thought it was a wonderful thing to tell me and Jack. And it's something I've never forgotten. It's always been a source of comfort. So when I look back at my parents, my family, my upbringing, I have nothing but gratitude. Right? And as I get older, I see it all as a gift because you don't choose your own parents. That's just a pure gift. Well, life goes on. A year later, I found myself in Bellflower, California near your place at the annual convention of the Young Calvinist Federation, 2,000 young people from all over North America, singing, Calvinists are we, let our colors be, over land and sea, high and furl. And this was to the battle hymn of the republic. Right? And the place was jumping. Very inspirational. And that's where I met Jane. Now, C2 was from Vancouver. There were about 30, 35 teens that had traveled in old 1940s cars. And we camped along the way. We were billeted at church families around there. And wonderful trip. I met Jane. See, I'm telling you all this to establish my Calvinist Christian credentials. So I love this stuff. Trust me. When I do my channel, you won't have me tire of this. So keep going. You're doing great. Because for a lot of people listening, what you're describing is a strange world. But in the CRC, especially people of your age, this is the story. Yeah. And it's precious to me. Yeah. Right? Yeah. Because it's mapped me. And it's a gift. All of it is a gift. So anyway, yeah, Jane and I met there. And two years later, we married. We were just shy of being 20. And the Lord has blessed us enormously with four children, grandchildren, even a great-grandchild. And we're still together. And that, too, is a blessing. Now to my brother, Jack, who was my late brother, Jack. He died at age 58 from cancer. Jack was a year and a half younger than me. Very talented, very popular with the young people. He loved song and music and theater and dance. And he performed in all the Christmas plays and school and church. And very, very popular. But the clouds started to gather when he was about 17, 18, when he discovered that he was attracted to men. So in our little community, if you're confronted by that at that time, what do you do? You go and see the pastor. And the pastor sent Jack to Bethesda Hospital in Denver. And they had him there for less than a day, I think. Very quickly, they said, look, your problem is not mental disorder or emotional. You, for whatever reasons, we don't know the reasons, but you're just wired differently. And there's nothing we can do for you. You're going to have to deal with this. And it's going to be a very, very difficult journey for you. Because all your whole life long, you have to fight sexual urges and passions that all of us experience that you cannot give in to. And we hope you will have some strong support from people around you. But we cannot do anything for you. So Jack was back with that message. And Jane and I were married, recently married. Dad had died. Mom was alone. He was working. Three months later, I think, he disappeared. We don't know where he went. Well, it turned out he went to Calgary. And that's where he remained the rest of his life. He did take up contact with us. And he would, for the rest of his life, he would come two or three times to Vancouver and visit Mom. He was unable to really discuss and talk about it, because we were unable to know what to do with this. We didn't have the tools to understand. And I look back at that. And it was a learning experience. And Mom tried to talk to the pastor and people in the church. And nobody knew how to comfort her or support her or give any kind of advice. And that was very, very difficult. Before long, he said, look, I'm not talking to anybody about this, because nobody understands. And it goes nowhere. And I don't want to sound bitter. I don't blame the pastor. I don't blame the church. Those were the times. We were totally unaware. And for most of us, this was deviant, disgusting behavior, despicable. And people didn't want to talk about it. You wouldn't talk about it. I'm grateful that, and I'm sure that for Jack, and I don't want to overplay this, but that guy, the poor guy went through hell. When the community that nurtures you rejects you, when you're 18 or 17, 18 years old, I cannot imagine what he lived through. But he found his way in life. He found a different community. And he flourished in that community. And he spent a lot of his free time in theater, particularly for children. He had two long-term stable relationships. And unfortunately, he also became an alcoholic his whole life long. Now, towards the end, we grew much closer. And I'm grateful for that, particularly the last years. And we grew much, much closer. And we were able to talk about things. And one of the striking things, and I think I said that in an article, one day he said to me, Nick, I have not been in church much, but there's not been a day in my life that I've not prayed. You know, it's a wonderful testimony, right? That God's grace works through people. After all, he was a child of the covenant, baptized. And he made confession of faith. He was very young and he was so enthusiastic. Right. And so anyway, that's the story. Now, I also have a sister. And my sister stayed in Holland to complete her studies when the family moved to Canada. And C, it turned out, is a lesbian. So she didn't want to talk about it or disclose that she was uncomfortable at first, particularly to say, Mom. But then when Jack's story came out, she disclosed her own situation. And that was actually very helpful for my mom and for all of us, because the Dutch churches handled that at that time. And I'm talking about the mid-1960s very differently and certainly not all the Dutch churches. But my sister had had special training to be and she was ordained as and worked as an evangelist, which is an ordained position in one of our mother churches, the Grijs Mere Kerk. And so she was employed by six or seven inner city churches in Harlem, which is one of the largest cities very close to Amsterdam. But you see, at that time, there was a student body at the Free University. And that student body had some members that were same sex attracted, and they they looked at that issue and they started to discuss this. And people from the Free University Psychology Department and from the Theology Department got involved and Catholics and Jews became involved. And there was a whole network around the Free University that started to rethink the church's position and or what they took to be the Bible's position. So my sister received an enormous amount of support. And through that, my I should just back up. Basically, what she was told is sex is good in its place. And that that that is that holds for heterosexuals and also holds for you. In other words, no promiscuity, no sodomy or rape or. You are to exhibit love and faithfulness to your partner. And you are to honor God and praise God. In your sexuality. Just as the person born blind was asked to praise God with his blindness, so you must think of your situation. So she. She has been in that relationship ever since. So, you know, her and Anne, they've been together for over 50 years. She's 83 now. And they truly love each other. And I've seen the commitment and every week she's in church. My sister and she's she's she's the most wonderful Christian. You know, I mean, she has all the virtues of of sainthood about her. And I can truthfully say that. So what was helpful is that she started sending materials from home to my mom. You know, little booklets with titles such as. Your child is same sex attracted, question mark. And then there was instructions and help for parents. How do you deal with that as a Christian? That was very helpful for my mother. During that time. Now. I'm just. I'm just relaying to you my personal story. You know, yeah, yeah, I don't want to make generalizations out of that. I realize that there are many different unique stories. And I'm not going to sit here and say, now, everybody has to be exactly the way. My family experience, because. Sexuality is is enormously complex and it's personal, it's individual, and it's. It depends on culture and tradition. But, you know, it certainly those experiences have certainly shaped. My understanding of it and the way I read the Bible. Very much so. Why? Why do you think the Bible says what it says about same sex behavior? Well, I. I. I think, you know. You have you have to read the Bible in context, in the context that is historically culturally conditioned. And, you know, I'm not an expert on any of this, but I'm comfortable with the view. The Romans one for instance, dealt with male prostitution, pagan temple worship, and that there was sodomy involved or abuse and that there was promiscuity involved. And that there is. Something new happening, particularly the last 50 years, when you see Christians. So same sex attracted people who are faithful to each other, who are in committed relationships. I find it very difficult to believe that Romans one or the Corinthians passage. That they are about. Same sex attracted people in stable, committed relationships who love the Lord and love each other and try to. Understand their relationship as a as as covenantal, as a commitment, as. A pledge to each other that they hold each other to. You know that, so. I. I think what the what the Bible, you know, the Bible, But as you well know, it's very difficult book to read. Very difficult. But you can minister to school. Pardon me. That's why we send ministers to school. Yeah, yeah, it's very difficult to read, but you have to take the whole scripture. And the Bible. Reveals God. It's God's self revelation. You want to know who God is that, you know, it's not propositional truth, as you so often mention. It comes to us through stories and how God acts in concrete situations. And so in in those particular situations, whether it's Leviticus or Romans one. There was a call to living faithfully with each other. And we have to take that message. And apply that in our situations. And call each other to faith and hold each other to them. You know, I've just been reading. I don't know if you can see that burning in my bone. Yeah, yeah. Eugene Peterson. This came up. Yeah. Very, very interesting. Yeah, it's an interesting guy. Where, you know, particularly the last 20 years of his life, he struggled intensely with this whole question. Yeah, same sex unions and so on. And then so he finds he sees people in same sex unions. Who are Christians and 20 years later, they're still Christians and they're godly people. And he notices that for Eugene Peterson, his burning in his bones was his quest for sainthood, to be a saint, to be. United to God, to have communion with God, to know God. Right. That that was his burning desires. He sees same sex union and people in those unions who have the same burning desire. Who also want a godly life, who also want to serve Jesus, who also try to be faithful. So Peterson looks at that, you know, this is not just the writer. There are quotations, direct quotations from his own journals and from private correspondents that are quite revealing on this issue. So then he starts to question, right? And he starts to question the traditional interpretation of Romans 1, and he comes up with something like I just mentioned. And. You know, he refuses to take a stand on this, either for or against. He's neither affirming nor traditional. He wants he wants to embrace these people. And recognize that they are children of God and acknowledge that in as much as they give evidence of wanting. To search for God and to have communion with God, to encourage them. And support them. And so I find that quite admirable. And I think there is a lesson for us there, and he's horrified by. You know, what we're going through in our own denomination, namely this taking of sides. Right. He just and I find that quite inspirational. You know, the longer I think about it, the more I think we're we're headed for. Something that will end that I agree with you there. And we got it, we we have to change the conversation. Well, I agree with that, too. We did. This is a dead end conversation. Yeah. And, you know, and actually, that is where I thought your three hour talk about ideals and shared ideals and aspiring to it. It was very helpful for me. Thank you. Because I thought, yeah, I agree with you. Any volunteer organization needs a shared ideal. But what is that? Yeah. Right. And, you know, you said, OK, male or female for life is the highest. I disagree with that. When I listen to the Bible, Paul. And I say it respectfully because I have nothing but admiration for you. But I think the Bible. Urges all persons. Of all times and places. To aspire to union with God. That that that is what we need to aspire to, saying to it in Peterson's Eugene Peterson's turn around. To to, you know, and Jesus says that, right? This is eternal life that they know the one true God. To know God, we need to aspire to that. Can we not invite the people from the other camp to say. Our ideal. It transcends. Marriages, same sex unions and gender and sex. We have something bigger than that. It transcends that. And and what it is, is our search. To be united to God, to bring heaven to earth. You know, you talked about how we're very much involved in trying to knit together, having an arm. We are. But you see that that has to that that that to me is a mission, a goal that transcends. The stuff we're dealing with today. Part of the difficulty of this issue. For many people. Is that if. The Bible got this wrong. What else did the Bible get wrong? And, you know, I've. Some of the some of the individuals that I know that are same sex attracted and grew up in the Christian Reformed Church. I mean, that's a deep that's a deep question for them. And I think I think part of what has been disturbing for many of them is the. A lot of the a lot of the exegesis and biblical work that has tried to make arguments that Paul wasn't talking about this kind of thing. It's it's it's a difficult case to make because, for example, there are no. Same sex, you know, open same sex committed couples in the Bible. I know the women in church office issue, you know, with the Christian Reformed Church had 20 some years of battle over that. You know, there are always these these outliers and scriptures. You had Lydia, you had Deborah, you had Junia, perhaps. And so. You know, part of what for for many people, this is this is a terribly difficult issue. And. It's. It's it's interesting to me, well. I think in many ways, this issue is a real test of Protestantism in many ways, because Protestantism really wants to say. We should be able to bring this to the Bible and all come to an answer together out of it. And and that often hasn't worked with Protestants. Now. One of the one of the one of the issues that, you know, even in your brother Jack story, did your brother Jack ever seek out any other kind of church in in Calgary, because certainly lead by that point, there were affirming congregations in Calgary. Did he ever join with any other congregation there? Not that I know of. So really, when he went to Calgary, you didn't you there was sort of a gap in your relationship with very much so. And, you know, he he would come at it. I had built I was in the house building. I built a duplex. And so my mom lived on one side. And that was a wonderful arrangement. But when Jack would come and visit, you know, he would also interact with us. And and Jane and I would. Number of times we would go to Calgary and visit with him and Peter there for a day or two. So there was some contact, but, you know. We could it was always very superficial. We could never really. Partly, mostly because I didn't know what to say. And and how to how to approach this topic and where he stood with God, for instance, and how he saw this. He was just angry at the church. Mm hmm. A lot of anger. And so, yeah, you know, it was only much later that. And our youngest daughter, I, you know, she did a wonderful thing. She named her one boy after Jack and Jack came to the baptism for that. Wonderful. Because that was like a homecoming. Yeah. Right now, there are so many hard stories in this. You know, I had a I had a friend who I grew up with in Patterson. He, you know, he our families were fairly close. His mother was my piano teacher and he. He eventually also became I knew him at college a bit. And he also he went through seminary after I went through and he also became a Christian reform minister. And he. You know, he. He became it was very strange because my family and his family were always sort of on the progressive end of the Christian reform church, very much into inner city work. That's what my parents had done. A lot of racial reconciliation work. And he. He when I came to California, he was already out here in a very conservative church and he. You know, he railed against women in office and. You know, many of these kinds of issues and was really held up by his local congregation as a champion, a very conservative champion. And then it was discovered that, in fact, he had been living a double life and that he had had. You know, he had been doing things in San Francisco that that weren't talked about in the small town where he was pastoring and. You know, he was very quickly. Disciplined and removed from office by the church and sort of disappeared and. You know, they're just they're just layers upon layers of sadness and. And you know, your story about you and your brother is really touching in this way, because. I think I think today there would probably be less alienation. And more capacity to talk. I have another. He was my cousin's best friend, you know, grew up in another small C.R.C. Berg. And, you know, he went to use it. He's a terrific guy actually listens to my channel fairly often. I reconnected with him a little bit because he left comments. He liked Jordan Peterson, but, you know, went to Calvin College with me and was a terrific musician. And then, you know, left. You know, left, you know, basically got out of the C.R.C. And, you know, went off, disappeared of family, kept track of him. But, you know, had a rough life, a lot of ups and downs. And, you know, is currently much better reunited actually with his with his family and even with the church that that he grew up in. And I certainly for a moment won't challenge. The idea that. I think I think we stand in a better position today than certainly the generation of yours and your brothers. And I mean, the story that you tell me is just immensely sad because even, you know, I have five children. You know, if I if I would think about, you know, from your mother's point of view, you know, my my my children so. One of my children sort of going off and to that degree, losing the fellowship of the family. It's a it's a it's a tremendously sad story. It's a tremendously sad story. But how to you know, how to. You know, I want to I want to have productive conversations in the church about these matters. And and it's getting it's getting more and more difficult. And I don't know. You know, certainly some people some people say the time for talk is done now. And, you know, we're better off splitting amicably. I'm not sure about that. I don't like splitting at all. At the same time, the same time, the political compromise that the church made to. To support women in church office, which is something that I I supported and continue to do, has hardly within the denomination necessarily made either the complementarians nor the the the women that I know who are ministry terribly happy. So these these questions are so difficult and. You know, I too want to find a way forward and I don't know. You know, fortunately for me, I'm I'm not the pope of the Christian Reformed Church. I'm not in charge. I'm a minister of one rather insignificant congregation. But, you know. And I very much, you know, I'm really glad that you came today and shared your brother's story because. You're you're you're giving your story is not you're not alone in your story. And and many who listen to my channel, who are probably on the more conservative end, get frustrated that I'm not more dogmatic and. Closed on some of these things. But and then for that reason, I think, I think, I think your story is important. And the story of your brother is important because I again, I know many others who every story is unique, just as you say. But there are many sad stories that are similar to this one. Yeah, if I may just respond, you know, Paul, you started by saying, you know, people say, well, how can the Bible have gotten so wrong? Yeah, it's not the Bible that's wrong. It's our understanding. We're talking about different interpretations and that's an ongoing thing. You know, there's the when I was a kid, I was not allowed to fly my kite on Sunday. We were not allowed to have an ice cream on Sunday. Right. And and more seriously, we have in my lifetime, we've made all kinds of changes. You know, children at the Lord's Supper, for instance. And I mentioned Sunday observance, but the place of women has changed enormously from what it was. You know, I did a little research project into the history of the CRC churches here around the Vancouver area. And I traveled around, talked to seniors groups. And this one person, very elderly lady said she had the nerve in the late 50s at a congregational meeting to ask a question. And she was told by the pastor, Sister, I need not answer you, but I will give you an answer. Because women were not expected to speak up in church. My point is that we have accommodated, if that's the right word, I'd like to see it expressed more positively. The spirit has made us see that there are different ways of experiencing the Bible and seeing the Bible, reading the Bible and living the Bible. From what it was. And, you know, there's a dynamic, historical unfolding aspect to creation. Creation is not static. The Holy Spirit did not stop his work two thousand years ago on Pentecost Day. The Holy Spirit, you know, Jesus is present today. He didn't disappear behind the clouds. He's gone. He's with us today. So it ought not to surprise us that the church will. Have renewed insights into how do we apply God's word, how do we strive for godliness in our time and place? And I'm not afraid of that. Oh, we might make mistakes, but, you know, it's not if people look back and say, well, how did the Bible get so wrong? It was a different time, different place. So, yeah, I, I too very much wish that there was a way forward. And I do think I started by talking about changing our ideal. Right. And. After your three hour talk, I thought about that a lot. You know, if the ideal. Is union with God. I think, for instance, about our attempts now to have codes of conduct. That's outward. That is describing behavior on the outside. It has absolutely nothing to do with what goes on inwardly. You know, our God looks at the heart of a person. And I think these attempts now to because actually this this homosexuality question is an attempt to put some fences around human behavior and say this goes and that doesn't go. Right. And we'll give it the stamp of confessional status and boy, now we have a real strong something to hit people over the head with. And I think it's it's wrong. It's it's just totally wrong because we're aiming for the wrong thing. We're looking at the outside behavior. And I'm not saying that, therefore, anything and everything goes. I'm not saying that at all. I think within the Christian community, there are lines in the sand and there are. Goals and goalposts. Instead of having a code of conduct. We should try to measure godliness. I think godliness is the right standard. Now, you may say, well, that's way too. It lacks specificity. You don't what on earth are you talking about? No, I don't think it does. I do think that particularly in the local situation, in a community of believers, you can maturely talk about. When does someone transgress? Godliness, when when does someone's behavior indicate that there is no godliness at all in that person? You know, I I have some experience in the 1990s, I served on a national board, the National Board of the National Organization in Canada, Christian Organization. They had about 70 employees, fairly large. And towards the end of the 90s, you know, the courts in Canada became more attentive to gay rights. And the lawyers of the firm said, listen, if you want to protect yourself because you have 70 employees, what if one of them or more decides to enter a same sex union? What are you going to do? Wouldn't be very good for your reputation. No, we don't want that. Well, you may have trouble firing this person, but one way to perhaps do it is adopt a code of conduct. Oh, so we get all busy writing up a code of conduct. Right. And it was directed solely at homosexuality. But of course, we have to put in all kinds of good things. And I thought it was so wrong. Because we're measuring outward behavior. How do you measure greed? You know, how do you measure it? Paul says right in line with sexual immorality, greed is next in his list of gross sins. We used to read it out before the Lord's Supper every time. Right. And how do you measure greed? I've never seen anybody, anyone put under discipline for greed. Right. But sexual immorality, boy, we can hit people with that one. So anyway, on this board, I was the odd person out. But and I resigned when they when the board majority vote adopted that, because I think you're measuring the wrong thing. Yeah, you got a standard, but it's not God's standard. And I, you know, so then you say, well, I have no standard at all. I like Eugene Peterson's. Is this person aiming to be a saint or not? Is this person walking? Is there anything in that person's life that indicates to me that there is godliness in that person or not? It may be more difficult to measure. But I think it would be far, far, far richer and it would give a much, much better testimony to who we are. So my proposal would be. Drop this whole thing as a denomination and aim for those and aspire to goals that are that are laid out in the Bible. You know, Paul, particularly when it comes to marriage, what is it supposed to be sacramental? It's supposed to be a reminder of the greater union with Jesus and his redeemed. So. I can go on and on, Paul. I mean, what, you know, Newland Avenue, so Newland Avenue and Grand Rapids, you know, in their leadership team has appointed someone in a same sex religion. Now you're over in Sacramento. In what way is your ministry of Livingston's impeded by the action of Newland Valley? Go ahead, let Newland Valley be the avenue, let them be who they are. And you can go and do your ministry. What they decide to do there regarding this issue in no way impede your ministry. And it shouldn't. We're fighting these battles that are, in my view, dead ends. And they're they're only going to lead to us all of us going over the cliff. You know that there's also a big move in the denomination for codes of conduct, too. Yeah, I think it's totally wrong headed. Absolutely wrong headed. And I wish those people would read Eugene Peterson. I think he would agree with me. He would look for godliness in a person. Did the book treat that last episode of his life, one of those last interviews? It did treat that because I was wondering because I haven't read I haven't read that. I haven't read that biography of his. But I know that that, you know, that was kind of a sad, sad note on his, you know, very distinguished career. And I wondered what exactly happened. I think it was Jonathan Merritt who interviewed him. Yeah. So so so so that, you know, I won't go it's in there and you can. It's actually a sad tale, particularly from the church. There's the reaction from the church. But anyway. You know, we his his. To me, his main legacy is the Jesus like concern he has for the things that are truly important. We're always majoring in minors. Eugene Peterson didn't major in minors. And he wanted to stay away from this fight about he wasn't going to. He was going to take a stand. Right. And but he he was deeply. Disappointed. In what he described as the utter meanness of the evangelical community. You know, and this is what what a code of conduct does. The more you concentrate and focus on a code of conduct, the less of Jesus there is in your ministry. And I don't think that that is too strong a statement. I've seen it over and over because you start to be fixated on outward things. And that's all we can measure. And boy, can we measure that? But the more important matters get forgotten and overlooked. And so, you know, I I'm preaching, but what I really would hope for is that within the leadership of our denomination, there would be some voices that could say. There let's indeed aim and aspire for the very highest ideal. That pertains to all of us, whether we're hetero or homosexual. Married or unmarried. It's universal. And that is the quest, the human quest to know God. And to to have that influence and direct and shape and shape how we live out our lives. And, you know, I wish. That. The report that we're now dealing with. Would encourage us to sit down with young people who find that their same sex attractive and that we would ask them. How do you experience your sexuality as an avenue to bring praise to God? Can you do that? How would you do that? You are called with whatever gifts you have, whatever infirmities you have. You're called into being to praise God with your life. How do you plan to do that? Can we help you? You know, that that would be a totally different approach from the one where the track we're on. And I think Jesus would would approve of that. But you see this report doesn't it doesn't even enter their head that it is possible within a same sex relationship to praise God. That that is just, you know, page 111, they kind of look at, could this be from the Holy Spirit? Well, it could equally be from a totally different spirit, namely the spirit of secularism. Well, that's a wonderful way of dismissing this, isn't it? But don't we have any faith that that that God is working in people's lives? That that, you know, that is the that is the other that is the other position. And when the committee that produced this report was set up. Senate decided to. Prevent the committee in anticipation of the report, partly because of the way other pastoral care reports had come forward, particularly the report that came forward in in 2016. And in many ways, that other position is the position of the press, the PC USA, which I believe was Eugene Peterson's denomination. That's the other position of the Episcopal Church of America. And I think part of the difficulty. So we have these two positions and we ask, OK, which which position honors God with our sexuality? And, you know, again, as you've obviously listened to my channel plenty, you know, my mind quite well on this part of how we are going to listen to the spirit over the next few centuries will be by watching not just an individual lives, but intergenerationally. How these issues play themselves out, that is a that is for me. You know, like I say, I'm very much a moderate in this and I'm very torn by this issue. And so then I look for OK, I look for I look for evidence on both sides. And part of I mean, when I ask you why there are no why there are no same sex couples in committed relationships in the Bible that are manifest and and also why we have this position in the church now, because we do know that in the Roman Empire, the first, second, third, fourth centuries, there were abundant examples of. Individuals in same sex committed relationships and for some reason. The church didn't go that way and and that's that's a difficult thing that I think the the inclusion or the affirming side really has to wrestle with. And most of the arguments that I've read on the affirming side tend to take the tact of, well, Paul's talking about something different in Romans one, Paul's talking about something different in a few of these passages, you know, dealing with the Leviticus passage, Leviticus 18, that's a little different. One fairly high status. Evangelical now progressive evangelical ethicist, I think quite rightly when he was visiting Christ City Church, San Francisco, quite rightly noted, you know, really the created order Genesis one is is the far most difficult, by far the most difficult passage to wrestle with with this now. Again, looking at all of these questions in terms of what the ideal is doesn't necessarily answer. The subsequent questions, which is what I think the. The human sexuality report was tasked to answer if you maintain the traditional position if you maintain the traditional position. What then is the answer for those who, for whatever reason, will likely never be able to measure up to the ideal if you say that this is the ideal and. You know, how can we move forward? And I think I think I'm really hoping to have some members of the human sexuality report come on my channel and talk to me. I had gotten at least some initial agreement from a couple of them, but I haven't heard back from them. But this, you know, one of the difficulties that I have with so with the conservative side is. A case like your brother's story, this is something that this is a piece of data that I think we all have to face up and own. That and I think the human sexuality part tries to do this sometimes to say, you know, we have certainly not in the past. Honored the commitments made by the church to your brother and and I think you're very generous in laying that out that you know, given the times and the dates, you know your mother. You know, and the pastor and you know the organization in Denver. Very, very difficult and i'm i'm very i'm happy that you know I am glad that we are having this conversation today, I think that is important. But you know part of what I want to do is is at least facilitate having this conversation as best we can and and that means. listening to your story and and hearing the story of your brother and hearing from. And I think you know all one body is trying to do that with a lot of their videos hearing from members of the church that have these experiences that you know. That that that share their stories, I think that's vitally important, but we have to you know I, we have to do well on all sides here to do to ask very difficult questions about. You know why. Why is the Bible, the way that it is and Okay, so the dominant answer from those, especially within our tradition that want to say. Well there's been a there's been a misinterpretation of these passages Okay, and you know, as a minister I every week all these books behind me I deal in multiple interpretations of biblical texts. You know that's take have a text, you know many, many interpretations and we deal with that so. I too want to see us do this better, I disagree, you know I I can understand why neil and made the choice that they made. I I don't think it's quite so simple as to say. As to say. Whether or not neil and has a lesbian deacon and a same sex relationship doesn't impact my church in Sacramento well you know, yes and no, and I would I would suggest that there there may well have been in the denomination. Other churches that I know there's certainly been other churches that have had gay and lesbian. office bearers. Whether or not you know the particulars of their lives, we don't know, but but part of the way in which neil and has brought this. Especially in our current political context clearly was an attempt at let's say a test case in which it sort of challenges the denomination. Okay, what are the enforceable norms in this church and this, I think you and I would both agree. We certainly want to have enforceable norms in the church, you know, for example, we've all seen the. You know the stories of rabbi's at carriere if we had a minister who was doing things like rabbi's at carriere had been done most size would say, oh, this is a. This is a question subject to discipline, but but even in the story of of my friend who you know left you know it left his wife. natural born children adopted children. Some of these things are not. These things are not easily mended and the kind of fabric that we have you know I love the way you started your talk to because you very. You very beautifully, I think, related a world that that many in the Christian from church, particularly of your generation. That world is gone, but it's there was a beautiful world, and you know it was a world of you know you're you're a little bit a little bit younger than my parents, but. You know they're beautiful things in that world and I love the way you told your story. And so I really do want us to figure out how we can. have productive conversations about this very difficult issue in ways that, on one hand. honor the text honor the traditions within which we have interpreted these texts honor hard questions that we bring to the text, but also honor your your brother. And his story and your sister, you know this is this is part of the difficult work of trying to do all this now the human sexuality report. Is another synodical report, there are many of them that pass through Christian reformed history and part of the reason I think we make these reports is because. We can debate them because they're just a report and so that's part of the beauty of words and paper, or you can. You can bang it against the table, you can say this is wrong and throw it up in the air, you can, or you can say wow this really I really I really think this does well, so you know I I do want us to continue to. To pursue this and part of how we do it is by the processes that we have as a denomination we have. councils and classes and synods and reports and and you know, right now we have this amazing thing called YouTube where you know I can meet you this way, and you know it's I so much prefer. Meeting you this way than just getting an email because by even what I see of you and by your voice and by your story, you know my heart just goes out to you and. You know your your family story is such a sad one, and I would I would love to say that you are alone in this, but of course I cannot. And, and I am with you that we want to tell a better story for for many like your brother who find themselves same same sex attracted and. Okay well does my Community turn its back on me and and. But it's so it's so difficult so that's you know again that's I know i'm going to get criticism for. letting you share your story like you did, but quite frankly I I try to make no bones about the fact that that's how I want to use my channel because. Your story and your brother story matter and people will differ of interpretations or should have been that or should have been this or maybe it should be this way. And I want us to have those conversations but. i'm you know I really appreciate what you've done here and what you did in that you sent me the copy of the a lot of people in the United States won't know the. You know the Christian courier, which is this, which is a Canadian publication that tends to be about Christian reform things and you know your article is very beautifully written and you know I could. I could pick at things and I do that in my other videos I pick at things but that's that's just me picking at things and I don't want people to you know. I want to I want to offer people things to think about, but I don't know I don't know if any of that's been helpful to you, I just I just want to tell you that I really appreciate you coming on the channel and sharing your story and even if. i've got a lot of thoughts which you obviously know if you made it through my three hour video. We have to look at the stories and we have to look at your brother's story and we have to look at the text and we have to ask hard questions of the text and I think that's I think that's really our only way forward. Well, thank you very much Paul I appreciate your genuineness and I also appreciate appreciate the fact that. Not everyone will applaud you for your work and I appreciate it. appreciate the fact that. Not everyone will applaud you for giving me air time. So thank you very much. You know, can I just ask you this. In your three hour one you made a big point of saying that the highest the greatest ideal. Is male female for life. Ideal for marriage that's not the highest ideal by any means Christ was not married. To the best of our knowledge, apostle Paul was not married to the best of our knowledge, so I wouldn't say that's the highest human ideal, but I think perhaps structure for marriage. But you know i'm not so sure even about that. And David had nine wives, if you if you want to take the Bible literally you can make a good case for polygamy and you know matters of sexuality are largely determined by time and circumstances, but beyond that. I think you can't you should not say well my highest ideal here is for marriage, of course, I also have a spiritual side of me and I want to search for God that's very contrary to the reform tradition. You can split your service of God your search for unity with God off from something like marriage, you know the marriage itself has to be a search for God, you your your union with God finds expression in the way I treat my spouse. Well, I would argue and you've you know if you've watched as many of my videos it sounds like you had you've also watched some of my rough drafts for Sunday you'll know and you recognize it right away i'm sure. Nearly every single one of my sermons I structure the ending in terms of misery deliverance gratitude. And so, our quest for the ideals are not for an ideal of marriage is not to earn favor with God or even to achieve something with God, but is in fact the gift we give back to God in grateful obedience to him and that then becomes Calvin's use of the law, and so. I just felt that in that when you did that and you made a lot lot of that you put a lot of emphasis on that you said, you know the other side the affirming side they don't have an ideal they don't have a true ideal. And so you made a lot of this, you know your ideal and I thought by doing that you were denying your best self. You were denying your best self. You know the other side the affirming side they don't have an ideal they don't have a terminal idea they don't have a line in the sand and so you made a lot of this, you know your ideal and I thought by doing that you were denying your best self. You are incorporating something that is not Paul Van der Kley. Well, I've known myself for 50. How old am I now 58 I've known myself for 58 years so I'm not I'm not so sure you're right on that count, but it's well, the reason again I'm not going to rehash what I took three hours probably way too long to say is just briefly, there are aspects to male female differentiation. That are more ideal than male male female female. I don't deny that at all. Well that's my only point. But, but don't don't say that that is the greatest highest ideal, which is going to unite the church, and if you give up on that it's going to be the death of the church. I, well, first of all, Protestant Church, because that's key, because Protestantism is a big piece of this. Yeah, that's something that is, but look at Quebec, you know, you know, that's all that's all Catholic. So what's happening there. Oh yeah yeah well well I'm not saying that the Orthodox and the Roman Catholics don't have other ways to die, or that this is the only way Protestant churches die. I'm not saying any of that either. But what I'm saying, see I wanted to I wanted to put forward that argument and the reason I put it out there is, I like getting pushback I got plenty of it in the comments and it's good getting pushback from you too. But it's, but it's this question I really wonder if. And, and I've got lots of questions about this still, but I really wonder if there isn't something fundamental and about this issue. And in fact, I still will hold to the case that I don't think I don't think the progressivists. I think they're going to struggle with a terminal ideal, because I, I don't think they're going to find it as instantiated as this other one that's that's just my position, but I'm just I'm just one guy, the progressives. They do have lines in the sand for now. Because I mean part of what's difficult is that your generation, and this came through in your credit your Christian career, your generation very much sort of said born this way. It's nature not nurture that position has been quite thoroughly eroded in subsequent generations, and many. So you've got LG, many and BTQ. Don't go there with born that way at all. That's why it's so upset. Of course, of course, most of them don't go there but those within the church should maintain that it is about committed relationships, and you're not free to do whatever you want. I mean our culture says, you can do whatever you want as long as you don't harm anyone. That's not a Christian position at all. And the, the, the, the all one body are should not be thrown in with that kind of a view, because they clearly state. It must be within the bonds of commitment. How is a bisexual individual to achieve. Must they choose. Well, you know, I have no right to speak on that, because I don't. I'm not competent to speak on that. And I'm only, you know, I think somewhat competent, because I have lived my whole life. You know, with homosexuality and from very close by. I have interacted with it and reflected on it and I, I, I should also say that among my very first memories are my mother's voice, who said that boy should have been a girl. And she was talking about my little brother Jack, and I found that such a strange comment. And the reasons he said that and she said it over and over is because he wanted to be dressed up in dresses and he wanted his hair along and ribbons in his hair. He wanted to help mom in the kitchen I was out in the garden or on the street but Jack was Jack was a female in a male body. And it was absolutely. I mean, very, very strongly so. His voice is mannerisms, the things that were of interest to him. So, yeah, okay. You know, I'm shaped by that I cannot speak to some of the other. You know I hate doing that but I nor do I think, should we employ the so readily the slippery slippery slope arguments oh yeah starts here but you know what, right. I'll tell you something else I was involved in that Christian organization that wanted to develop a code of conduct, and I was opposed to it and one of the other board members who in every way I respect came up to me and said, Nick. I don't understand why you support pedophiles. And I just left a gas and I said, They're not the same. I said if you want to take out the word homosexual and put pedophile I'll sign this immediately. Right. Oh yeah, but you know, they have those inclinations you know and and children are not safe around them, you know, that was the dogma the 50s you can still find that that is that is just such ignorance. And that is a slippery slope argument. Oh yeah, they have these tendencies. Oh yeah, that's where it's going to end up. It's not helpful. I have one other question. Okay. And that had to do with the title of your three hour talk. Yeah. Is that, is that title helpful to bring about dialogue. I think it's true. What would it not be perhaps more conducive to building bridges. If you put it in the way of a question. I thought about that. I thought about the question about thought about making it a question. It's on YouTube, it's a, I think there's another slippery slope titling thumbnails are real slippery slope on YouTube between doing something that's going to attract attention and getting attention by poking a little bit. And that's something that sort of by virtue of the way it's framed people will not talk. And so, but that's not unusual for preachers we have, you know, we have to title our sermons. That's sort of a thing that you always deal with as a preacher so I decided, you know, I thought a lot about that title and, you know, usually by the time, usually maybe two or three days before between, you know, I'll just state on a video a couple of days, and I'm happy I gave it the title I did. I understand, you know, and different people from different sides have pushed back on that title. Some people on the conservative side really didn't like that I said marriage equality because that's sort of the term being used by the other side, but I, I, I'm still happy with the title. You know I, I think a lot of people will look at that title and say, Oh, we know where Paul stands. Yep. And, but you start by saying that you haven't made up your mind. No, that's still a work in progress and you're, you're still exploring. Well I, again, it's important that I didn't say, I said the Protestant Church, because by its nature Protestantism is also not a terminal ideal. And I think that's something a lot of Protestants over the last 500 years have forgotten. This is a church that is in protest against certain things in the Catholic Church, and the Catholic Church has been protesting, and the Orthodox have been protesting against each other. By virtue of the term Protestant. I think we should look forward to and anticipate Christ's prayer for the church that we'd be united. So, I'm part of what I've, what has been interesting about the title is that different groups have selectively sort of read over different parts of the title. Because I, this is a, I mean because. So, part of what's developed on my channels the channels gotten broad enough that I've got a significant Orthodox audience I've got a significant Roman Catholic audience, and I've got a significant audience of atheists and spiritual but not religion people. And so, I'm also often in, you know, I've got plenty of Orthodox and Roman Catholics that are like Banderclai when are you going to finally give up the protest and join us and it's like well, which one of you. And at this point, you know, no I'm, I, you know, even though you like again Protestantism is a very long thing. It's certainly far longer than my lifetime. And, you know, I hope to, you know, be in ministry until my retirement I hope the Christian reform churches, still around 10 years from now. I don't know that it will be. I don't know what kinds of. I very much am concerned that basically part of the breakup of the RCA and then this issue will initiate realignment of the Christian reform church and some people want to have a big swap where there's one conservative denomination and then one more conservative denomination and I don't know. But I, I'm still I'm still comfortable with the title. Because it gets attention, and it provokes conversation. And so, I appreciate what you're doing Paul I really do and I admire you. You are building bridges across divides. And I, I always admire how you see the interconnectedness of many things. And, you know, that's a wonderful gift so continue that. I hope that we can find a way forward. That will center around what is, I believe, a more important aspect of the gospel the call to walk with Jesus, and to bring the life of heaven to earth, you have that interaction. And to not be fixated on outward obedience. Well, Nick, I wish I really enjoyed this talk today and I'm really glad we got a chance to talk this way. It's so much better seeing you and hearing you and, you know, I read your story this morning but it's it's so much sweeter hearing it from your lips, and I'm, I think, you know, I'm glad to be in the same denomination with you. And, and that, and that we can talk and hopefully our little conversation today is of help to someone. And, you know, many others beyond our denomination will listen to it but I hope others within it listen to it. Great. Oh, thank you very much. Thank you, Nick. Take care bless you. God bless you too. Bye bye. Bye bye.