https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=5dm7lTDdBOg

 Hi, this is Paul. The video, the Dark Horse podcast that Brett Weinstein did with Sam Harris came out right before my vacation. And that's why there's a delay in me making a commentary video of it. A few of you on Twitter and out in the real world said, oh, you're going to be all over this one. And that's right, I am. I listened to it on the day before I left and I listened to it on my trip and I've been listening to parts of it ever since. It was a great conversation. So the first thing I want to say to Brett and Sam, doing a Freddie thing here, is good job. It's a great conversation. Bravo to both of them for modeling what we should be doing in conversation for, I think, working hard to try and produce a lot of truth and more light than heat. They're not adversaries, they're friends, that much is clear. Sam was also on a conversation with Brett and it was all really excellent. This is a lot of what I think many of us were hoping for from the IDW. I listened to Rebel Wisdom's conversation with John Vervecky that was released, I think, the day after Christmas. And, you know, I share a lot of the same sentiments as David of Rebel Wisdom. A little bit of disappointment in the IDW. We're hoping for more of what Jordan Peterson sort of unleashed. And in many ways, Jordan Peterson was missing in this conversation. Jordan just brings a lot to the table. And we've all been missing him, I think. And I really hope, I don't know whether he's been quiet because he's working. I don't know if he's been quiet because he hasn't felt up to any of this or whatever is going on in his life. I have no idea. But wish him well and really want him to get back into the game if he can. Realize just how hard all of this stuff is to talk about the big issues. Terminism, free will, what is truth, how should we live. These are very, very difficult conversations. And so all of my commentary, which will have some combativeness in it, I'm sure, is all meant in the spirit of, let's challenge each other's ideas vigorously. And let's see what we can figure out. Let's see what we can share. And let's see what we can articulate. One of the things that I was impressed by listening to this long conversation is what a generous host Brett is. I've listened to a few of his podcasts now and I've really grown to appreciate his work in them. One of Ben Shapiro's first Sunday series with Jordan Peterson that I did was both an example of how difficult it is to interview Jordan Peterson. Brett very much is patient and really wants to give his guest time to speak. Now that might frustrate some of you because Sam goes on and on at some points and it's almost a four-hour conversation. But again, I really am impressed with Brett's skill and his patience and in the verveky corner of the universe. We've been doing a lot of talk about wisdom and whereas I've been hard on Brett in a number of ways, I'm really impressed in this format and I think he's doing a great job and I'm really glad that he's taking time to do what he's doing. Now the beginning of this conversation opened up with really what is pretty standard. Sam is perhaps on sort of a book tour and he wants to talk about his book online. And now I haven't read the book but knowing what I gather about Sam Harris, nothing I've heard from the treatment of the book has surprised me given who Sam Harris is and what he's been doing. Now there's a really quite a good review of the book on philosophy now and it sort of addressed some of the things that I would imagine would need to be addressed and Brett addressed many of the same things. There's the definition of lying in terms of stating a falsehood which is a very useful rather low resolution binary perspective on the world and there is a way of lying which is deceiving even with truthful words and it has to do with a selective view of the truth. Now all of this boils down to something that we've been talking about pretty much from the beginning which is that the world is way too large for consciousness to fit into. That the world is complex, there are a near infinite number of truths that I could state about this messy office that I'm sitting in only the corner of which you are seeing in a two-dimensional screen but somehow we need to act and consciousness needs to filter this world and so when it comes to lying or telling the truth all of that is behind, all of those realities are behind that and so it is as many people have noted throughout history it is you can lie with truthful words and that's exactly where Brett goes in the conversation and that's exactly where Sam does his usual thing about it and where this review of it engages and my some of my thoughts about it were very much maybe I'll read some of this review for you. It's not hard it's not hard to see well it's not hard to see why Harris takes this view. Acts of commission tend to be more brazen and more harmful than omitting acts in part because of their active nature. In any case lies of commission are the focus of the essay and what she talks about. To illustrate what this involves Harris gives example of his friend having to respond to an unwanted house guest asking if he minds him to stay longer. There's a question of we have truth and love that's a big conversation in Christianity because of what the apostle Paul says in the New Testament. However this evasive tactic of withholding one's actual feelings by inserting a less relevant albeit true statement is a far cry from being honest. In fact this skillful truth telling is nothing more than lying by another name and this is the difficulty of this framework. Harris is therefore being disingenuous when he suggests that we can avoid lying by articulating irrelevant truths. And you know I think a lot of what's behind the timing perhaps of Brett's releasing of this book as he talks quite a bit not Brett Sam's releasing of this book as he talks quite a bit about it with Brett is the Trump administration because Donald Trump has a way of speaking mistruths all the time but the bullshitting that Vervecky and in fact I noticed that Brett used that term in this and it made me wonder if Brett is listening to any of Vervecky stuff. But the bullshitting that is going on in this that Trump is regularly accused of is often just like a magician uses and I think of Scott Adams in this conversation of you know point over here point over there and all sides in a debate use this. In fact it's a very skillful technique in terms of rhetoric. So the the reviewer here finds Sam Harris's articulating irrelevant truths just as disingenuous as lying. Honesty requires that we bear our soul so to speak and potentially and and potentially voice difficult truths not simply avoiding them. Stating verifiable facts that have little to do with our real sentiments does not let us off the hook. Now remember this is a psychotherapist writing this review. Despite his apparent inconsistencies in Sam's argument in his view truly caring for another person requires that we not gloss over hard truths and I think this is commendable. I think this is also this is also loving and and the place of love in Sam Harris's world that he doesn't want to connect with Christianity I think should point him to perhaps having a conversation with Tom Holland. I'd like to see a more combative conversation with Tom Holland and Brett and Brett not Brett. I'd like to see him talk to Brett Weinstein too but I'd really like to see him talk to Sam Harris. He maintained that an individual who is brutally honest avoiding white lies and false encouragement will have to will have more beneficial relationships with others. That's true. Now it depends a lot on whether the relationship can bear such honesty. He gives the example of a friend who asks him if he if he appears overweight. Now what's interesting about this example is in the early parts of this conversation Brett introduces Zeno's paradox and and Sam kind of migrates the conversation over to the question of when do we know something is a a when does something become a heap and and this is exactly where Brett challenges him and as is usual with conversations that I've seen with Sam Harris. Sam Harris doesn't give an inch and I don't think this is a terribly helpful habit that Sam has with respect to some of these things because well are you overweight? Well what is the ideal weight and and what metrics do you have? The ideal weight in terms of appearance, the ideal weight in terms of longevity, the ideal weight in terms of a wrestling match, the ideal weight in terms of and and these are exactly the kinds of questions that Sam Harris's now I want to use the word naive here I don't necessarily mean it pejoratively when I use the word naive I think very low resolution rather simplistic view of the world that this is where a lot of his schemes tend to fall short and many many people who have critiqued Sam's work have brought this forward. Sam responds honestly that his friend could lose 25 pounds but again Sam doesn't say you should lose 25 pounds to make way to the wrestling match you should use 25 pounds to perhaps decrease your risk of of heart attack or stroke you should lose 25 pounds to look better and hopefully you know gain a spouse because you look more attractive. This is exactly the contextuality that Vervecky's system has been bringing forward of relevance realization as opposed to Sam's rather flat view of truth and falsehood and again Brett tries to challenge him in the conversation about this and get down to the last the last bit of this review. Harris's major and dubious assumption however is that complete honesty is possible and and that isn't because of a lack of necessarily lack of intent or goodwill that is because our difficulty in knowing the truth and this is going to come up again and again in this conversation. The concept of unconscious motives or maladaptive psychological underpinnings that we know nothing about or of bad faith a form of self-deceit are not considered in Harris's analysis but consider the example that in an effort to be a good honest friend Monica overcomes her hesitancy to tell Bridget that she looks fat in that tight fitting dress although she doesn't recognize it. Monica is jealous of Bridget and unconsciously feels underlying self-deception and simple ignorance that prevents Monica from being able to articulate the underlying truth. One might argue that it is impossible for anyone to be truly honest about many things as long as he carries biased perspectives hidden resentments unresolved longings unacknowledged insecurities or a skewed view of self to name just some of the inner human conditions and before I named some of the outer conditions. However if absolute honesty is impossible then we are all liars by nature at least to a degree perhaps the best we can do then is only lie in the ways that are intended to promote another's well-being but that's going to be difficult for us too or spare them unnecessary pain but right there you have the relevance realization questions of well what is another's well-being is it in let's say you have a doctor that is very selective about the truth you come in and you're smoking too much and you're drinking too much and you have too much weight and the doctor says oh you look nice today meaning the clothing that you've chosen to hide certain aspects of your appearance and accentuate other aspects of your appearance is that the kind of doctor you want again we're back to the relevance realization conversation. So Brett sort of pokes at some of this stuff with Sam but doesn't really go too far into it. For Sam Harris truth telling reveals a lot of his anthropology. We, those he's admonishing supposedly, are simple naive observers who must articulate the truth to others but as the complexity of the world grows Sam's system is increasingly unable to work through the relevance of what's happening and suss it out. And that then asks the question of what are the relational dynamics between the others you know as this article pointed out maybe Monica is feeling jealous about Bridget and maybe Bridget maybe looks like a supermodel but has gained four or five pounds because she's allowed herself some indulgent eating over the holidays and the other woman is looking at her and the other woman is maybe her mother who has put on a lot of weight or maybe her mother who's or maybe a friend who's anorexic and everyone looks too fat you know on and on and on and on you can go. And the difficulty about the shadow difficulty about Sam's approach to lying is that there is a hidden moral dismissiveness of others that any lack of truth telling is well is it is it done in bad faith. Who are you know others who are somehow ignorant of lying ignorant or lying to themselves or others about the truth. Not to deliver the brutal truth is to rob others of agency power and causality and again I think there's a good point to be made in Sam's point about that but it's contextualized by everything that's going on. Now one of the things that I very much do want to get into this video are the question of two worlds because what was so amazing about this conversation is Sam's ability to I was thinking about we should call him patch because in a sense what he does is he has a patch over one eye when he's talking about lying and he slides the patch over over the other eye. I can see a new prop on the horizon slides the patch over the other eye in order to see a different way. All right so a lot of this video we're going to be talking about two views and two visions of the world. So in this first vision of the world Sam sees through let's say the first person eye and it's a rather simplistic again naive low resolution view of the world where there's truth and falsehood and everything is sort of black and white. All right now what's interesting is that's rather a scientistic approach to the world that lacks nuance but then he's going to act like a scientist and run it down. But as we see at least initially my initial impressions of the lying book based on his conversation with Brett and the review that I just read seems to be that not a lot of nuance in it but Sam's going to work his patch here and the way is one eye that's sort of the first person eye and we're going to talk about that as the manifest image. Human beings are simple naive agents for whom truth is obvious but not quite to all which leads us into our little relational difficulties and we have a moral duty to employ truth with reason to achieve well-being for all. This would be Sam's sort of first person view of the world but very quickly the conversation is going to turn over into free will and that's where things get complicated for Sam and what Sam does in a sense is shift the patch over to the other eye and now he wants to talk like a scientist and human beings are merely characters in a movie. Now we're going to play some of this video later on in the video but before we do it I want to sort of establish the vocabulary and establish the terms because what Brett and Sam continue to sort of trip up on in this conversation is in fact these two perspectives of the world, these two visions and as I said Sam seems to have a patch he has it over one eye then he has it over the other eye and what he keeps doing is sliding the patch back and forth within the conversation and this is partly why Sam is such a frustrating conversation partner when it comes to this because what we'd really like to do is take off the patch and see the world much more clearly through two eyes and one of the better I have to thank Dr. Jim from Idaho who brought this to me in a conversation that we had one of the good videos on it only about 3,000 views on on this particular I was completely unaware this is a philosophy professor from the University of Austin he's got a whole bunch of videos on philosophy he's an excellent teacher the sound quality isn't that great kudos to to John Vervecky for for doing his series with the sound quality I'd love to see more people like Professor Bonavac do conversations here but in this video he introduces the work of Wilfred Sellers who I've talked about in previous videos but I want to play a fair amount of this video today because if we understand what philosophy has been dealing with in the 20th century and as we often see philosophy and these other conversations are stalking each other if we understand the philosophical background and the philosophical tools that have been brought to the conversation here I think that will help us have a better understanding of Brett and Sam's conversation going forward so let's play some of it so I want to take some terms from one of the greatest 20th century philosophers and again I'm sorry I've got no control over the quality of the recording that was happening in this in this video it's not very good but I'm sure I'll continue to look for other other conversations and videos that have a better sound on some of the stuff Wilfred Sellers he was very concerned about this problem and introduced a terminology that is immensely helpful for thinking about the difficulties let's start with this definition of philosophy it's a very very broad definition it will seem at first like not a very helpful one but actually I think it's an extremely illuminating one let me start that in the aim of philosophy abstractly is more what it is is to understand how things in the broadest possible sense of the term hang together with the broadest possible sense of the term the idea is that the individual sciences describe individual parts of the world aspects of our overall picture of the world and so this talks about physical objects and interactions in other words we're going to be talking about the parts and the many some of you might remember that this was a a good piece of the conversation between Jordan Peterson and Bishop Barron the whole and the many how do we take the individual pieces of the world and put it into a coherent whole how can we talk about a coherent whole how can we while we're trying to talk about a coherent whole deal with the individual parts now you can very quickly see why consciousness comes to the fore in this because experientially for us consciousness is the space and that's a metaphor that we're using and in many ways as I listen to this conversation with Brett I really do want to hear see Jonathan Jonathan Peugeot and Brett have a have a longer conversation on metaphorical truth I'm not going to touch that that comes at the end of the video clip that I'm going to play today but so anyway consciousness is the space in which we engage the particular but also attempt to create the frame by which we can understand the particular because the particular has no meaning outside the frame I would argue outside the stories which frame all of the particulars and so Wilfred Sellers wants to bring this together and as we'll see he's going to have to bring together two visions two visions of the world and this is why again I'm going to call Sam Harris Patch because he's always sliding the patch from one eye to the other and if you watch the myth busters on eye patches there's this theory that pirates wore patches because out in the broad daylight out in the open ocean you want one eye which is adjusted to the light but then if you go below decks you want to slide the patch over and have one eye which is adjusted to the darkness in a sense it's a kind of ancient night vision so what Sam Harris keeps doing is sliding that patch back and forth and now Daniel Bonavac is going to show us about tell us about these two eyes these two visions that we're using biology talks about life astronomy talks about the heavenly bodies and the universe as a whole we've got other sorts of theories psychology study of the mind sociology the study of society but how all these relate together and in particular what does it mean to be human in a world which we understand in terms of so many different kinds of theories that really is the problem of philosophy how we put all those things together into an overall picture now Suther says this really wouldn't be so hard except for the fact that there are two different kinds of pictures two different kinds of images that we confront when we think about the world two different kinds of pictures two different kinds of images that we confront when we look out at the world again through this space through this vision of consciousness the philosopher is confronted not by one complex many-dimensional picture the unity of which such as it is he must come to appreciate but by two pictures of essentially the same order of complexity each of which purports to be a complete picture of man in the world and which after separates would mean he must fuse into one vision two visions each of which says this is a complete vision but there's reality and and a lot of validation to both visions and this is exactly well when I play the clip you'll understand exactly why I'm phrasing it this way these are the two visions of the world okay here's a vision that says this is the whole vision here's another vision that says this is the whole vision philosophers look at both of those visions and say we have to figure out how these visions relate to one another sellers call these two perspectives the manifest image and the scientific image and the problem with philosophy says it's the manifest image and the scientific image okay we're going to talk about that a lot really something like the problem with stereoscopic vision how to combine two different images into a unified picture now our eyes do that all the time as beings with two different eyes we take these slightly different images and we put them together this is how the brain perceives things as being in three dimensions even though it's given two dimensional images on the rack takes two two dimensional images that puts them together and gives us three dimensionality well philosophy has to do something like the same thing it has to take a picture of ourselves that is developed in the sciences but also the picture we have of ourselves in everyday life and somehow put those together into a view of what it is to be a human being in the world how do we do it well each of those images seems to be a complete image the manifest image is our ordinary way of thinking about how we interact in the world it's of ourselves as agents who act who think who have desires and so he says these are really supplementary ways it's the framework in terms of which man came to be aware of himself as man in the world in other words it's our ordinary way of thinking about things we began thinking the world is consisting of objects we recognize that we were objects in that world we have thinking about ourselves and so that partly unreflective and partly reflective picture of who we are is part of what defines the manifest image but this is not all there is to it if we think about the objects here the basic objects of the manifest image he says are persons animals lower forms of life merely material things like rivers stones at one point that's cabbages and kings there is a good example of a and it happened with the manifest image actually it's a sad picture as facebook reminded me the other day it was almost exactly a year ago that freckles time he put up a picture of his cat but so it's not for the press you i'll show you another image that looks like that isn't one of my cats but it really looks like one uh anyway the scientific image is a different image of ourselves and of the world it's if the world is consisting for example of micro particles ourselves as being physical beings driven by visible forces it is a world that is controlled by maybe unconscious psychological forces or economic forces or a variety of other kinds of forces that social scientists that psychologists that physicists and proposed as being fundamental to the way the world works now what's interesting here again getting back to the lying conversation with respect to sam harris is that in many ways sam's view of lying is part of the manifest image like they're a liar they're lying in other ways if you look over at the scientific view well a psychologist will say well this lying business is very very complicated because we deal in a world full of many subtle truths and we're not exactly sure well is my friend overweight overweight for what overweight towards what end as a sumo wrestler i don't know if you can be overweight um as a wrestler of a certain weight class oh yeah he's overweight uh for your health you know and and these these things stalk and so the scientific vision has a certain is it is a is a little bit of different kind of thing from again from this manifest vision and we want to try and put these two things together and so sam again sort of like a patch over his eyes keeps flipping them back and forth now he's seeing through one eye now he's seeing through another eye but sam never saying i'm seeing through this eye i'm seeing through that eye until we get to the conversation about free will where we really start seeing him flip this patch back and forth and so as soon as you get you might say the introduction of theoretical objects things that are not themselves observable something dramatic changes over the weekend one of you sent me a question say you're presumptive theory how this idea of the two level theories connected to the basic theses of the enlightenment to the theses of truth and knowledge and objectivity in progress and so and i said well actually here's the thing something new happens as long as we're just describing things that are visible to us then it's one issue we can do that at a level that still remains within the framework of a manifest image when somebody like la was just looking up the stars and he's charting their movements that's something that we can do within the framework of the manifest image itself in other words once we are dealing with while we are dealing with things that are obvious to us that are visible to us we can deal with that sort of within the manifest image but when things that when we are dealing with things that we can't see like things beneath the the imagined truth telling or the imagined lying by the other person now suddenly we're delving into the realm of the scientific and so the the space of these two images is vitally important but as soon as we introduce something new some sort of theoretical object some theoretical entry like an atom or a quark a proton something that is really not directly observable and it doesn't have to be physical yet it could be the id the ego the super ego it could be some other kind of consideration whatever it is we introduce this and now suddenly we have the two level here we're not just describing one thing within the within the framework that we've already we've got a complicated issue now we're trying to connect what you might describe as the macro level image we have the world in the manifest image and the micro level image we have at the level of the scientific science gives us a picture of the world and ourselves that is in some sense hidden the true nature of things is not directly observable something else is going on in some more fundamental realm and so we get this sort of picture and this is why it becomes a problem for the humanities for thinking about what it is to be a human being we realize that the manifest image level the circus level we think of ourselves as rational beings this is our level of rationality of morality we do things that act in ways that are sometimes good sometimes bad sometimes right sometimes wrong we take or fail to take responsibility but in any case we have responsibility for our actions we make decisions we make choices we act and we have to take the responsibility for what we do we also within that realm think of ourselves as free we engage in practical reason we say why should i do that we think about problems it's by applying solutions now again pay attention sam harris has his patch over the scientific guy and he's dealing with a manifest image and he's talking about freedom and rationality and art and morality and all of these things and he's going to switch the patch over and he's going to well as a scientist a scientist what all those things go away now now what um what bonevec put on the screen there was the the majority assumption now of the scientific community which is that the manifest image is dependent upon the scientific image that assertion that assumption in many ways what is behind all of the philosophical and religious and theological hustling all right and because we feel we have well we have more confidence in the scientific image but pay attention now confidence we are manifest smuggling here because confidence is a function of the manifest image and so what you what we're going to continue to find is that people who are promoting the scientific image as this is the foundational truth they keep smuggling in the manifest image in terms of motivation and all of these other kinds of things beneath the scientific image in order to manage the interchange and the negotiation behind these two visions now with the level of the scientific image things look very different the world seems to be governed by either causal well either deterministic causal laws or statistical laws as in quantum mechanics the science seems to be down to three three there really are terms like obligation responsibility right wrong good bad within the framework of that imagine a physics class if someone says okay the speed of light is this you say well is that good or bad i think it's wrong right anything's wrong for it it's like to go that fast it's speeding um that there's there's no one to make sense of that right within the framework of physics itself and so moreover within that realm either things appear to be purely determined which is the way they seem to be at the end of the 19th century before quantum mechanics or at any rate they seem statistically driven so either we get determination or we get randomness but in neither case do we really seem to get anything like rationality or morality and so we right you get determination or randomness which again this is going to be a big part of the conversation with brett and sam but you don't get rationality in that with sam's patch over the manifest image eye and trying to see the world through his scientific eye we face a problem understanding what it is to be human we thought we understood that in terms of being rational agents in a complex world trying to stay alive and solve problems and then we get this picture of the world and of ourselves it implies actually we're not making decisions we're not acting freely and there's no point in talking about responsibility so in that sense there really is a clash of these images there are conflicting claims competing claims the scientific image claims to be a complete picture of the world the scientist basically says i'm going to give you a theory that accounts for the motion of physical particles for example and explains everything about what happens in the world including your behavior and it's that complete this claim that gets scary because wait what room is left now for rationality for decision making for freedom and and this is of course something that sam harris never goes into because with his patch over the um the manifest image eye what room is left for rationality rationality is is sam's main gig but again he flips the patch over to the other eye and says ah no it's rationality and by rationality we know that the scientific view is correct ah but sam you're gonna have to put these two worlds together and what you do is you just keep switching back and forth the patch goes one away the other eye one eye the other eye and again you're gonna see this throughout the conversation with brett brett is very much trying to peek up pick up the patch a little bit say sam look out of both eyes at once we know you got two eyes we know you can see out of both of them try using both at once and then maybe let the mouth move and and maybe we can get somewhere but yeah if everything is ultimately to be explained in terms of science there's a marvelous sculpture in the middle of the river in berlin that illustrates this it's called molecule man and we have actually several figures grappling and fighting it out in the middle of the river well anyway what really is the key difference between the manifest image and the scientific image we've already talked about the difference between observability and being a theoretical entity that is unobservable that's one crucial difference but really the key difference according to sellers is normative it's the gap between these thoughts the irreducibility of the personal that is to say the manifest image is the irreducibility of the plot to the ends now there's a long argument in the background for that i used to have you all read that in this course at the very beginning it simply discouraged everyone because sellers is one of those difficult writers of the 20th century and so i decided i will just talk about it and not actually make you read it but that's the key idea of a previous distinction about this manifest image it is the idea of rationality of morality of normativity of our judgments of things as being right or wrong correct or incorrect that seems to have no place in the science of the given okay right there now if you go back to jordan peterson brett weinstein sam harris those conversations isn't an ought kept coming back to that because in the scientific world there's no there's no ought you can't find an ought in the scientific vision and so whenever you got that manifest whenever you've got that manifest patch over the manifest eye ought not come out of your mouth but did you hear that sentence ought not come out of your mouth i just put an ought on an ought and this is exactly the difficulty with continuing to put the scientific vision first and saying the scientific vision is primary well once you have that primary there's no room for ought there simply is is there we are there we have it all right so two images of the world the job of philosophy to articulate or explain how they fit together the first-person agent we employ the vision of the third to achieve what our first-person characters wants and this again is why i'd say as human beings it will be inescapable for us let me say that again it will be inescapable for us not to deal with these things as first persons we cannot view the scientific world without the manifest vision we can't do it we can't do it which is what makes philosophy important in this now i want to bring in another horseman now i want to thank job i picked this up on those of you who we have this discord server uh called bridges of meaning that some of the people from my local meetup started and there's near continuous conversation on that discord server between various members of people who are interested in what we're interested in and job who have had on the channel a number of times posted this article to me um by david bentley hart about daniel denett and in many ways sam harris is he and daniel denett i don't know how much disagreement they have between some of what they go into but this is a review of daniel denett's book from bacteria to bock and back um and this review is by david bentley hart david bentley hart as many of you know is an orthodox believer uh philosopher writes very large books is a universalist whole bunch of things going on with david bentley hart anyway so he has this he has this review of daniel denett's book from from bacteria to bock and back and right away bentley hart jumps on francis bacon because this is in he is in his opinion where some of this comes from the modern scientific novum organum as sam as francis bacon dubbed the new rationality that he hoped would replace the classical and medieval sophistries achieved its first systematic expression in the 17th century which with its admission to perfect a method of true of of pure induction in other words this is a the scientific image is a tool that we have developed in order to see the world to achieve certain things all right this is a tool this is a human thing this is downstream of human beings all right achieved its first systematic expression in the 17th century with its ambition to perfect a a method of pure induction it proposed to it proposed to the imagination the idea of a real physical world hidden behind the apparent one now later on we're going to talk about um uh hoffman and his hoffman and his idea of interface that's going to come up between brett and sam in that um it and now what what bentley hart is saying this goes all the way back to francis bacon that there's a real world um hidden behind the apparent one an occult realm of pure material causation utterly devoid of all the properties of mind and this is in a sense why pantheism is a way to try to once again address if you've been following this little corner of the universe uh jp has been putting forth pantheism pantheism is a way to try and bring consciousness back in to the conversation because that's the challenge that we're facing so a real physical world hidden behind the apparent one an occult realm of pure material causation utterly devoid of all the properties of mind most especially intentional purposes from at least the time of gallileo a division was introduced between what wilford cellars calls the manifest image and the scientific image between that is the phenomenal world we experience and our and that imperceptible order of purely material forces that compose its physical substrate so there you see what um david bonnevac was talking about and at least at first the divorce was amicable in as much as phenomenal qualities were still granted a certain legitimacy they were simply surrendered they were simply surrendered to the custody of the immaterial soul but mind was now conceived of as an expression within the frame of nature okay so then you have the framing and nature what nature has come to understand if you read c.s lewis's discarded image nature goes from being a personal thing a a woman a creature a creation into this ossified realm of laws that is impersonal we're going to be talking about that quite a bit in subsequent videos in all likelihood in the pre-modern vision of things the cosmos had been seen as an inherently purposive structure of diverse but integral inseparable rational relations for example the aristotelian itia which are conventionally translated as causes but which are nothing like the uniform material causes of the mechanistic philosophy and so the natural order was seen as a reality already akin to intellect hence the mind rather than an anomalous tenant of an alien universe was instead the most concentrated and luminous expression of nature's deepest essence that is why it could pass with such wanton liberty through the veil of isis and even deeper into nature's nature's image inner mysteries the cartesian picture by contrast was a chimera an ungainly intrinsic intrinsic alliance of um antinomies that sam and brett will have quite a bit quite a few interesting things to say about paradoxes antinomies have an interesting relationship to paradoxes and i wish they had brought that word into the conversation and reason of horrors and dualism moreover the science of their modern the sciences in their modern form aspire to universal explanation ideally by way of the most comprehensive and parsimonious principles possible you'll find that word parsimony used quite a bit by brett and sam in the conversation and i had to look it up because parsimonious i thought of you know people being parsimonious but in terms of evolutionary conversations it has much more to do with the preference for the most simple explanation for something rather than the most complex so it was inevitable that what began as an imperfect method for studying concrete particulars would soon metastasize into a metaphysics of the whole reality the manifest image was soon demoted to sheer illusion and the mind was perceived um then and the mind that perceived it as an emergent product of the real which is to say mindless causal order now david bentley hart is david bentley hart can write some long books but he's doing a good job of succinctly boiling this down right here here in this phantom space between the phenomenal and the physical worlds is just where the most interesting questions should probably be raised but denet has no use for those he is content with the stark choice with which the modern picture confronts us to adopt either a cartesian dualism or a thoroughgoing mechanistic monism and that is rather a pity since in fact both options are equally absurd and he'll go on to talk about this now a lot of what david bentley hart has to say in this article about denet i think holds also true of sam in this conversation i'm going to scroll down more towards the end for denet the scientific image is the only one that corresponds to reality the manifest image by contrast is a collection of useful illusions now this is where we're going to get into brett weinstein's metaphysical truth now i'm actually most interested in the last hour of this conversation which i'm not going to touch on in this video because the conversation is almost four hours long and in many ways a lot of this other stuff is prolegomena we want to talk about this stuff before we get to sam's idea of metaphorical truth or or brett's idea of metaphorical truth and sam's mere dismissiveness of a bunch of this when he has the patch over one of his eyes i read this again the manifest image by contrast is a collection of useful illusions shaped by evolution to provide the interface between our brains and the world and thus allows us to interact with our environments the phenomenal qualities that compose our experience the meanings and intentions that follow our thoughts the whole world of perception interpretation these are merely how the machinery of our nervous systems and brains represent reality to us for purely practical reasons just as the easily manipulated icons on a computer screens conceal the innumerable uncomprehending competences by which the programs run even while enabling us to use those programs so the virtually the virtual distillates of reality that constitute the phenomenal the phenomenal experience permits us to master an unseen world of countless quality less and purposeless physical forces now the thing that immediately should appear to us is that we are intruders in this world because we enter this world with purpose we enter this world with motive we enter this world with intention so is it a mystery why we feel so out of place in this world david bentley hart goes on to say very well in a sense dennett denitz is simply the standard modern account of how the mind relates to the physical order the extravagant assertion that he adds to this account however is that consciousness itself understood as a real dimension of holy first-person phenomenal experience and intentional meaning is itself only another user illusion that vast abyss between the objective physical events and the subjective qualitative experience that i mentioned above does not exist hence that seemingly magical transition from the one to the other whether a genetic or a structural shift needs not to be explained because it never actually occurred in other words illusion is a way of dealing with a gap by saying there is no gap you just slide the patch from one eye to the other the entire notion of consciousness as an illusion is of course rather silly and this is where sam uses consciousness but a little bit later within the movie we're very conscious in the movie we're having emotional experiences and brett will rightly challenge and say hey wait a minute what you're saying is the world between reality understood by the scientific image and psychology understand as this deep rich emotional world the manifest image there's no connection between these two you're just sliding the patch from one eye to the other sam brett won't use that language but i will because it's i'm a pastor i come up with illustrations to try and make what is evident in the conversation a little bit more clear to try to put a handle on it the entire notion of consciousness is an illusion of course rather silly dennett has been making the argument for this argument for most of his career and it is just um and it is just abrasively counterintuitive enough to create the strong suspicion in many that it must be more philosophically cogent than it seems because surely no one would say such a thing if there was no if there was not some subtle and penetrating truth hidden behind the apparent absurdity but there is none the simple truth of the matter is that dennett is a fanatic he believes so fiercely in the unique authority and absolutely comprehensive competency of the third person scientific perspective that he is willing to deny not only the analytic authority but also the actual existence of the first person vantage at the very least though he is an intellectually consistent fanatic in as much as he correctly grasps as many other physical reductionists do not that consciousness really is irreconcilable with a coherent metaphysical naturalism i don't think sam gets to that point i think sam just keeps switching eyes with his patch since however the position he champions is inherently ridiculous the only way that he can argue with its on its behalf is by relentlessly and in as many ways as possible changing the subject whenever the whenever the obvious objections are raised and i would assert that in fact this is a lot of what we see going on in sam harris's talk with jordan peterson and now sam harris's talk with brett weinstein i'll read the last paragraph of david bentley hart's piece perhaps the scientific and manifest images are both accurate then again perhaps only the manifest image is perhaps the mind inhabits a real platonic order of being where ideal forms express themselves in phenomenal reflections while the scientific image a mechanistic regime devoid of purpose and composed of purely particulate causes stirs only the blind random impulses is a fantasy a pale abstraction decocted from the material residues of an immeasurably rich reality certainly if denett's book encourages one to adopt any position at all reason dictates that it be something like the exact reverse of the one he defends the attempt to reduce the phenomena of the mental experience to a purely physical history has been attempted before and it is and is so far always failed but after so many years of unremitting labor so many enormous books making wildly implausible claims denett can at least be praised for having failed on an altogether fan on an altogether majestic scale now david bentley hart is many times very dismissive and that is classic of david bentley hart so in many ways benet is denet is a little bit further from harris and i think harris is less consistent and i think this is why we find this duality in so many of sam harris's conversations here with brett who is as he said sort of halfway between jordan and sam and brett's trying which is why i was very happy to see brett have this conversation with him brett trying to to to move sam a little bit on this and what in fact you find is that sam is moving in other directions as we'll get to later okay so let's jump into their video let's jump into it here anyway these these paradoxes are pointing in a direction the reason i raised it okay now we're at minute 37 which meant that about the first half hour the first starts with some niceties and then they talk about lying and i talked about that a little bit now we're going to talk about now we're going to talk about now we're going to get into free will this one here is that i have the sense looking at your argument on free will that it's pretty close to bulletproof but it's being now okay it's pretty close to bulletproof that's a strong statement now he's going to backtrack and what i think he's going to backtrack with is essentially something similar to this difference between the manifest image and the scientific image so he says on one hand scientifically sam when i look at your argument looks bulletproof but pretty close to bulletproof is compelling if it's the only argument on the table and it's pretty close to bulletproof but it's not the only argument on the table in fact the other argument which is not really an argument but it's it's how we find ourselves to be and not compelling in the same way if there are arguments that are similarly compelling on the other side in other words i don't think that the argument as you lay it out is completely decisive now that said now decisive is an interesting word and and i again i i've been hard on brett in a lot of videos okay and and i have but uh hopefully lovingly so because i have an immense amount of respect for brett and just that choice of words is an illustration of the skill that brett has and how smart a guy is now in america right now because of our own hierarchies about the highest praise you can give someone is say that they're smart brett weinstein's a very smart man and that choice of words decisive it's great choice of words because decisive is an action word it's a word that belongs in the manifest image it's a word that jordan peterson would bring into the conversation says but you have to live somewhere sam and there is no ought in your world and in fact action is all about ought what ought i to do now and we spent the first half hour saying you ought not to lie you ought to tell the truth now we're going to slide the patch over i would imagine that somebody who's explored the topic as you have hears that and you think oh no i'm sitting across from another person who doesn't get the problem with free will and you're not um i would say my battle on this topic with people has been to compel them of just what a um what a small fraction of the public conception of free will one actually has now what we're going to see is that there's this naive picture of free will which is that i'm just a person in the manifest image walking around and i want ice cream and all of the brett weinstein things that would say well over over you know evolutionarily this this sweet tooth that you have was vital for our ancient ancestors ability to survive but now it's making you obese but i like ice cream because fat and sugar oh give me can't get enough fat and sugar love the stuff um now that's going to be kind of the naive innocent view and brett's going to come and say oh we are there's a lot of stuff going on in our minds that are moving us in different ways and when when monica um when bridget asked monica does this dress make me look fat there's a whole lot of stuff on monica's side of the line that go into that answer it is it is not looking fat is sort of like the heap or zenos paradox and i think brett really brett brett wanted to use that to i think get at this but in conversations with sam harris these things don't go well because again as i've said with the brett harris sam the brett weinstein brett harris i can't say these words right jordan peterson brett weinstein sam harris conversation jordan kept wanting to build something and sam keeps knocking it down and there's a lot of that going on in here too but the question i think the thing that separates you and me is you believe free will is actually a non-entity and i believe it is a dim shadow of what people would like it to be and what many people think it is but not non-existent and that the fact of it's being difficult to attain but not non-existent is actually a vital fact okay so in a sense what brett has sort of mapped out here is a worldview and it's a worldview in which some people are more enlightened more free than others because of their ability to understand the scientific image about human beings okay because what the scientific image affords us is a degree of control and agency in other words what the scientific image does is increases our agency so the more we know and and that and then and then brett says okay we hold a mirror up to ourselves the more we know about ourselves the more i can walk down the street and say oh i like ice cream but that's just my evolutionary self trying to bullshit the little wantor inside of me and in order to not be overweight do you sam harris's thing and over to not be overweight i need to learn no how to say no to the ice cream all right now it's important to note that human beings have been dealing with this long before francis bacon or the scientific image ever came about again you'll find you'll find this in the apostle paul the good that i would do i would not do the greek conversations about virtue what i should do what i shouldn't do and all of this is based on a certain conception of the world that is highly rational and assumes agency and so right away this scientific view of the world is a tremendous tool in the hands of agents but but what has happened as david bentley hart notes is that in a sense the tool has consumed its maker and and we in fact have images of this in our fears in our future of the fears where we imagine ai will consume humanity and replace us this is the long march of evolution where we are consumed by what we make with our hands now i would assume i would assert this is a biblical theme as well because in the bible we long for glory and one of the one of the coolest parables in the old testament comes in isaiah chapter 5 where god makes a vineyard and gives it to the people but here's the funny thing about wine in the bible that wine is on one hand emblematic of glory but wine consumes us or wine can consume us and so we always have this challenge between the tool maker and the tool and will the tools of the tool maker destroy ourselves now there's another conversation which brett harris gets into this that i might want to comment on but i'll save that for another day one that's necessary and one that's reflected actually in a lot of the things that people know about how you run your life right well so let me make a few distinctions which i think will be useful because it's easy to lose sight of what the actual territory here is so to say that free will is an illusion or is nonsensical or that we don't have it is not to say that there's no such thing as freedom or see now we're going to wind sam zipping this pack back and forth oversized back and forth real quick it's it's a lot of swapping here not much integrating so listen very carefully to to that to that framework as he talks here because he's going to use a lot of words to try to you want to keep these worlds apart but he wants to deny that there's a problem between them or a taunt is an illusion or is nonsensical or that we don't have it is not to say that there's no such thing as freedom or autonomy or a difference between being coer in which world is there freedom and in which world is there not because there is no world there's no freedom in the scientific image that's the point there is freedom in the manifest image embarrassed in one circumstance or free to do what you want in another i mean those those we have to preserve those we have to preserve the manifest image he has differences in human life and our preferences there and i share those preferences you know to not be in a prison camp in north korea is a good thing and what's bad about being forced to be there is are all the obvious bad things about being deprived of freedom now now if you go back to the jordan peterson sam harris thing you know he scales up these psychological good and bad judgments into metaphysical realms uh and uh they have no governance over your your day-to-day existence so um the problem with free will is that let's look at the basic claim that's the problem free will is that you you're looking at two different visions sam but you don't know that and you're rubbing this patch over your eyes but you don't pay attention and you're not delineating that you're not delineating these two worlds when you're talking and that's the problem in your view here i'm there's the sense the the libertarian sense was called in philosophy the libertarian sense of free will which is i would argue people's default sense of it that's the naive okay i'm going to use that word that's the naive view of i want ice cream i want i i'm the thing want that's how i feel ice cream that's the thing out there this is the world in which sam lectures us about line okay that's the world he uses to lecture us about line this is a notion that the problem with it is that it really is impossible to map on to the physics of things whatever they are and it's right there it's the same harris thing your line book it's impossible to map onto your physics those are living in two different worlds sam so any my argument is that any statement of causality whether you're talking about a deterministic universe where you know effects follow from causes ad infinitum and these causes of necessity precede anyone's conscious intent i mean your conscious intent is something that that is happening on the back of you know in our case neurophysiology and gene transcription and you know on backward to the big bang that isn't a basis for this notion of libertarian free will but nor okay the libertarian free will the world in which he wrote this book about lying with his wife there's no room for that in this scientific world is any invocation of randomness into the picture so however you now randomness will be an interesting element in this because and c.s lewis actually in his book miracles gets into these questions a little bit because quantum theory was coming online then and it was getting more aware enough popularly that people were engaging this and and so right away as c.s lewis said well maybe there's a back door to agency in the whole show as c.s lewis writes in his book miracles and that is randomness and and lewis didn't go it didn't didn't want to go there and he said so that might suggest that there's more to this than that and so sam says well randomness is you're not going to get out of this you're not going to get out of this with randomness i think sam iris is correct about that add randomness you know quantum or otherwise to determinism you don't get freedom you just get you know the rolling of dice right the freedom that people you you just bump into the pragmatics and get statistics but what you're doing now remember where we started you have the many and the one the particular and the and the particular and the universal and well you can slide away the particulars with statistics is what we often use them for think they have is a kind of self authorship right where there's nothing oh there's nothing at their back that is fundamentally mysterious to them that is the actual effect of cause what now what's what's interesting again is is that even though sam is saying they have these naive libertarian free will people that imagine that they are being self-authored but what sam continues to admonish us when he slides the patch over is in fact to self-author ourselves with rationality and seeking goodwill and and all of these other virtues out there that he finds and so again it's it's just it just keeps sliding the patch what they think and do and want and intend and they are the the thinker and the doer and the wantor and the intender and by they they mean their conscious minds right they don't mean this oblivion at their back that is that they can't account for in the sum total of the stuff that goes on inside of their skin they know their conscious i mean there are there are people who pivot to that argument that's it's the whole person it's my unconscious mind in addition to my conscious mind but no the reason why free will seems like a durable problem for philosophy is that there's something that people and and in fact my conscious mind plus my unconscious so that's going to be brett's position his position is going to be in there well feel the ex like my own people who stuff that goes on inside of their skin they know their i mean there are there are people who pivot to that argument that's it's the whole person it's my unconscious mind in addition to my conscious mind but no the reason why free will seems like a durable problem for philosophy is that there's something that people feel they experience directly they feel conscious intent as being the proximate cause of that what what they voluntarily do now listen to that remember that carefully because when i go over an hour later this feeling this this this is what they feel okay later on when brett said when sam is saying we're in this movie but this is what we feel pay attention remember this part right here when he says that right there okay so again we got he just keeps switching eyes we get these keep switching out here so so i'm going to play it again now remember this when i play the later part cause tripled for philosophy is that there's something that people feel they experience directly they feel conscious intent as being the proximate cause of that what what they volunteer and sam looking out he's got the patch over the the manifest image the manifest eye seeing out through the scientific eye and say oh those people feel that okay we do and they feel that they are the the true upstream cause and one feature of that feeling or one thing that it suggests is the sense that if you could rewind the movie of a person's life right to a few seconds ago or a few minutes ago or you know days or weeks or years at any one of those choice points they could have done otherwise right that it's meaningful to say to someone you should have done you did x but you should have done y right and that given another opportunity with the universe being in precisely the state that it was they could have done y right that they're not merely robots or or you know some form of some concatenation of causes you know that there's not a they're not a string of neurophysiological dominoes that have been falling their whole life long okay they're not that now that's that's again read c.s lewis's miracles that's the whole show the vision of the whole show is that that's what the universe is that's not what lewis asserts but that's what he's saying the materialism that lewis was encountering in his day that's essentially what they say the universe is and that's what people are people are just another domino falling over you don't feel the meaning crisis creeping up on us with a vision like that they are agents that really could have done otherwise and there's no account of causality that makes that seem anything other than illusory right there okay it's got the patch over the manifest image he's looking out from the the scientific image and says there's no causality that imagines that there's a you who is actually making decisions in the middle of the meaning crisis we are in a sense alone looking out at the universe looking out at the dead world we are the only persons we're the only agents out there and everything else is math and now suddenly we have the sneaking suspicion what if i'm math too and and how many scientific movies or science fiction movies haven't we seen when when the person realizes that well it's the sixth sense let's look at that one when little boy i see dead people and and bruce willis people and and bruce willis is there as the good therapist listening and trying to help the little boy and then at the end of the movie spoiler alert if you haven't seen the sixth sense here it comes actually when i first saw it i thought i saw it right away that he's dead he's dead the guy shot him he's dead and he doesn't know it there's the meaning crisis right there we're dead and we don't know it we're illusions and there's no account of causality that makes that seem anything other than illusory again you have to add the caveat around randomness because yes randomness introduces the prospect that they could have done otherwise but it's for reasons that they can't own right if i told you you could have you could have married a different person that really was within the bounds of of the you know the the causal properties of reality for to happen but it could have only happened if you know we were if there was it had been some someone rolling dice differently in your brain right if there had been someone rolling a little homuncular aspect there a a different you know degradation of a radioisotope or something which would have led you to do something differently and that that's not the free will anyone thinks they have so let's let's take a couple things just off the table so we don't end up tripping over here at minute 44 you have no idea how much tripping you're going to be doing so for covering the okay for covering the manifest image eye and we're just watching a conversation that has already been happening it's already recorded poor bread at this idea doesn't know what's coming for the next hour but we do here's going to be a whole lot of tripping in this video and not the kind that sam harris likes to talk about on psychedelics it could be a whole lot of tripping more like stumbling around in a dark campsite subbing your nose on a lot of tree roots that's where a lot of this is going to be okay one um i don't think we can rule out at a formal level a totally deterministic universe but i think at a practical level we can and now now what do you mean what does he mean by that well we can't when we're trying to think about what we are we can't not imagine that maybe well and i think the reason brett wants to take this off the table right here is because brett's saying i don't want to think about the world that way but this is exactly how sam thinks about it that we're in a purely deterministic universe and we're all trapped in our bodies and we're just watching the movie play that's what we're doing and brett wants to take this off the table but sam's like no that's the table i think it is actually completely inconsistent with any belief in darwinism that what you have is a universe in which there was no opportunity for anything else to ever happen for its entirety from moment one then darwinism is an illusion and nothing in fact makes any sense including this conversation now pay attention to the language nothing makes any sense what what vision of the world are we seeing through we're seeing through the manifest vision nothing makes any sense in the scientific vision there's no sense to be made there just is the sense has everything to do with ought the sense of has everything to do with will and desire and agency and and all of the things that we live for that's the only world that makes sense sam is or brett is speaking out of the heart of the manifest image and he's saying let's take this off the table surely you don't mean this it's all some sort of odd theater and maybe the thing that makes least sense of all is consciousness that there should be an awareness taking place inside of a totally scripted entity makes no sense so anyway and and again go back to david bentley hart's piece that's exactly what david bentley hart is saying of daniel denet that okay dan then that's the world you're saying and we're all watching a movie right let's put it this way well let's bracket that because i mean that that i think is uh i think it's interesting to consider whether our notion of possibility is just a fantasy right right and as i said and and brett says right that's that's that's interesting but let's just dismiss that sam's like no wait a minute that's not dismiss that that's through the scientific image the scientific vision there's no that's there's no possibility there's no potential i said wait a minute we started this conversation out you writing this book about lying about if there's no more willful thing we imagine the manifest image it's truth telling or deceit or lying it's it's colonizing other people through shaping the world through our words that's where we started this conversation i said you can't rule it out completely it would be that the whole thing i mean you know frankly it could be that we exist inside a deterministic computer in which somebody had a purpose in getting us to have this conversation and feel some way within it and okay now we're in we're living in a computer what does that mean now that's an image and that's in i like coming back to the the simulation i think simulation exactly the wrong word for that but but that we're living within a computer well see and what that means is that see there's agency and purpose in this program we're running through but the agency and purpose isn't our own it belongs to someone at another level and we hate this thought we hate this thought we hate this thought because by the nature of consciousness and the way we use story and understand ourselves to be stories we're the center of the story and we hate this thought because this thought makes someone else makes us all pawns and we don't like that you know all sorts of things have to be left formally on the map but i think at a practical level a there's no percentage in it if this really is a totally universe then it's hard to even know how to complete that sentence the level of pointlessness of anything other than simply doing what you deterministically have no choice but to do is we're in the middle of the meeting crisis baby that's what it is and so let's you know but but even in even in that case there still is a there's a consequence to not knowing what's going to happen and there is the reality that apparent choice still plays a role in deciding what in fact happens is that you remember what i told you to remember before pay attention right here purely mechanistic one yeah but you you can't just wait to see what happens because that is itself all right now they're going to go on like this for a while they're going to go on like this for a while it's not necessarily great listening but they will so not get tripped up on this no you're going to do a whole lot of tripping now i want to bring back an idea that i brought out before um there are two kinds of things in the universe group a and group b group a are things that go on their own or what do we mean by things that go on their own like physics and math falling objects are predictable and and and there are things we see as random which as individuals we can't predict but as predicted we can predict those things as groups and that's good enough and that's where pragmatism and statistics and all that thing and so the question is well what is what is what are the elements of the things that we're looking out in the universe and everything's the the whole show c.s lewis's take on materialism in the middle of the 20th century is well there it all is it's all one big show of mechanisms going through and sam harrison in a sense says when i'm looking at the world then i would go which i this was when i'm looking at the world from the from the from the scientific image everything's group a well everything but me who's doing the looking but then there's these elements of group b and we don't want to give up on group b because group b is really important because we're part of group b and group b says things that watch and choose and employ reason and colonize things in group a so that we can do all these wonderful things with with reason that sam says we ought to keep doing and not dirty old religion but reason reason where we can make decisions about ddt and kill all those nasty bugs and and we can go down the road and we can see ice cream and say oh i shouldn't eat ice cream i want to stay trim um because i don't want to look overweight look overweight why look overweight for the sumo wrestling contest look overweight for the um my weight class in wrestling or boxing or overweight in terms of my doctor says i should lose weight for my cholesterol and my blood pressure or or what exactly is the ideal weight for a human being sam well it all depends this is where again we get into the relevance realization that john vervecki works on relevance those those if you're going to listen to if you if you can't listen to all of john's stuff listen to john's stuff on relevance and darwin that that section blew my mind because brett brings into the question well via darwinism see now right here it's via darwinism because darwinism is a perspective that says there's no purpose well then what are all the little what is the mechanism that is actually yielding the world and all of its complexity that we see here well the mexico mechanism is all of this choosing by creatures that well i'm going to go over here where the grass is greener and i'm not going to stay over here by a lump and be a stupid cow starving on a on a on a starving on a rock because i can't figure out how to walk three steps and eat eat the grass so but there's some there's a lot of tell-off smuggling that goes on in this stuff because there's purpose because the cow wants to eat the grass and so then we try to scale everything up from draw to scale everything up from survival but it isn't just survival because now also then we draw the line at survival and then suddenly we're back with jordan peterson and matt delahunty and we're back to instinct and c.s lewis and the in in the abolition of man where well wait a minute the problem with instinct is we have lots of them so i'm walking down the street and i see ice cream on one side and i see maybe a girl i'd like to meet on the other side and i think i could eat ice cream and that would feel really good but the more ice cream i eat chances of getting the girl are less because i'll look like job of the hut so suddenly which instinct my instinct to procreate or my instinct to have all that sugar and fat which one's gonna win you can't do it just instinct and suddenly we have rationality we have choosers we have agents we choose to act towards preferred outcomes and where does this preference come comes from well where does our desire comes from comes from each other well what do you mean it comes from each other is it just a social contract where is it coming from so we have two kinds of things in the universe and sam looks out one air and says ah it's just all group a looks out on the other side say be rational don't lie do many things be a good person get rid of religion it's like sam what kind of crazy eye test are you trying to run on us here here alfred north whitehead fun guy to bring into this conversation brings these brings these issues up oh i hate when i don't um have a slide that let's see if i can pull up the slide talks about purpose and reason but the point to which i wish to draw attention is the mass of evidence lying outside the physiological method which is simply ignored in the prevalence scientific doctrine this is the problem of the scientific image that everybody's looking through the scientific image and saying oh i see everything but what they don't see is themselves because they don't see that they're seeing the scientific image through a perspective and they're seeing with heart and will and mind and desire there's purpose all over the place the conduct of human affairs is entirely dominated by a recognition of foresight determining purpose and purpose issuing in conduct almost every sentence we utter and every judgment we form presuppose our unfailing experience of this element in life from the manifest image the evidence is so overwhelming the belief so unquestioning the evidence of language so decisive that it is difficult to know where to begin in demonstrating it for example we speak of the policy of a statesman or a business corporation cut out the notion of final causation and the word policy has lost its meaning as i write this lecture i intend to deliver in princeton university cut out the notion of final causation and and this intention is without meaning again consider the voyage of the battleship utah i was just at pearl harbor battleship utah it's in the pearl harbor story the battleship utah rounds the south american continent consider first the ship itself we are asked to believe that the concourse of atoms of iron of nitrogen and of other sorts of chemical elements into the form of the ship of its armor of its guns of its engines of the ammunition of its stores of food that this concourse is purely the outcome of the same physical laws by which the ocean waves aimless the ocean waves aimlessly beat on the coast of maine or pearl harbor there could be no aim in one episode then and there could be no more aim in one episode than in another the activity of the shipbuilders is merely analogous to the rolling of the shingle on the beach that's through the scientific image no it's just what comes there is no there is no human created climate change because humans are natural and this is simply how the world ends for human beings that come to this point we are of course reminded that the neglect of this evidence arises from the fact that it lies outside the scope of the methodology of the science we don't pay attention to the eyeball looking out at the scientific method that method consists in tracing the persistence of this physical and the chemical principles throughout the physiological operation someone is doing the tracking the brilliant success of this method is admitted but you cannot limit a problem by reason of a method of attack the problem is to understand the of the operations of an animal body there is clear evidence that certain operations of certain animal bodies depend upon the foresight of an end and the purpose to attain it it is no solution of the problem to ignore this evidence because other operations have been explained in terms of the physical and chemical laws the existence of a problem is not even acknowledged it is vehemently denied this is exactly what we're finding with sam and daniel dennett many of the scientists have have patently designed experience have patiently designed experiments for the purpose of substantiating his belief that animal operations are motivated by no purposes he has perhaps spent his spare time in writing articles to prove that human beings are as other animals so that purpose is a category irrelevant for the explanation of their bodily activities his own purpose for proving that they are purposeless constitute an interesting subject of the study alfred north whitehead you can find this on anthony flood's website so in other words they're sitting like sam harris with a patch over one eye and saying oh no purpose here can't find any who's doing the looking so we have two-eyed sam but one at a time please you have the scientific image with daniel dennett free will is an illusion brett says let's let's get these out of the way so we don't trip on him no there's no getting him out of the way this is his view but he's got a patch over one eye and brett's like well wait wait which which sam am i talking to and so i'm going to spend an hour on this then sam's manifest image you must not tell a lie live as if you can see the truth simply naively you can choose your words carefully you are offering the other party information or maybe they're dirty liars and deceivers and you're challenging them and correcting them you are challenging the other party to stop lying in fact he and his wife will write a whole book about it but over an hour later after a whole lot of tripping back we come to the two of them and let's listen in on some more are we have this we have this moment right and then things keep appearing and among those things are thoughts intentions desires preferences and it's on the basis of this roiling ocean of of that we make our lives okay now we're looking through the manifest image eye and everything is clear and that's a wonderful articulation of consciousness right there there it is that's how we live that's how we live keep the one eye closed right and so and no one who has a kid knows what that kid will be like as an adult or whether he or she will reach adulthood right that's just that that is built into the circumstance and any any story we tell ourselves about what was going to happen what was bound to happen however much we could convince ourselves that one or or the other of those stories is true now pay attention again to that part i wanted you to remember to put a flag in it as sam likes to say well here he is now he's talking psychologically now let's see now he's speaking as a man with a chest as c.s lewis would say in the abolition of man he's speaking about what it means to have a child and and what it means to care and and all of this and forgetting what he said about this now here we are talking like this and we think yes yes but it's like sam the goal is to use them both right or maybe that's not exactly how these two eyeballs are related it doesn't change the fact that we had to act under uncertainty in every in every moment and still do well and again we had to act under uncertainty from the scientific image there's no there's no there's acting going on but it's it's just the process of the whole show you know i don't know if i'm the only person who doesn't get this point or i'm the only person who does get this point there's only two of you in the conversation but i have the sense that none of the words that you are saying that we still we have to act in the moment i that those things lose all actual meaning not that you wouldn't be saying them now we're at two hours and six minutes i left off at about 45 minutes that's a lot of tripping but not that i wouldn't be hearing them and not that we wouldn't be you know there's no choice but any of it but they lose all actual meaning in many different frames they lose all actual meaning in the scientific frame in the scientific vision they lose all actual meaning there's no meaning to any of those words in the scientific frame the frame you say is the real world i mean they lose meaning again just if you're going to use the periodic table as your frame they don't lose meaning the fact is humans evolved they evolved to use language with each other to exchange abstract ideas across open space so that they could you see brett's trying to bring them in together and trying to bring the two together and sam's not having it reside in multiple brains simultaneously and their implications could be discussed well no there's there's no but you're smuggling purpose into there which need not exist there's the fact that this is all happening but we didn't do this so that we could do this we didn't it's not intentional but evolution built our capacity to exchange abstract ideas across open space ah but which eye are we looking through when we see that for a reason which is that it gave us competitive advantage over creatures that had less of that ability okay but that's a different reason that's not a there's no teleology in this system this is just this there's no there's no glory in this system there's no there's no final flourishing in this system because all of those things are part of let's get my answer all those things are part of the manifest image they're not part of the scientific image there's no flourishing in the scientific image you now if you use flourishing that there's you count the plants there's no there's more plants or if you count maybe even just you know chemicals popping in my brain well there's you know it's jordan peterson says take cocaine it just boom reaches you know maximize that pleasure right there you just have it quick you don't have it long can still be pushed from behind it's just it's effectively this is this this works like there's a survivor bias here there's a massive survival survivor bias to provide advantage in a universe in which advantage appears to make a difference between success and failure but now success and failure are value judgments and they're also time dependent dinosaurs were very successful until they weren't and so how on earth can we judge success now when we use these words and we use them abstractly we use them metaphysically we we draw them up into ultimate realms there is no ultimate realm in the scientific vision there's only ultimate realm in terms of the metaphysical in terms of the manifest vision and and that then now we're creeping into the our two world mythology as john vervecky likes to say which to me requires that some other outcome was possible were it not for the capacities in question that's yeah i mean i i don't see the again now we're sort of going around the same track here but i don't see the net that's right round around we go here we go back and forth back and forth necessity of supposing that i mean i think that may in fact be true right i mean possibility you know it stands a very good chance of being a real thing right but it's interesting to consider how reality would how you'd expect reality to look if it weren't a thing if there's simply just what how do you expect reality to look if it weren't a thing happens i would expect it to work the same way but if i could stand outside of it i would say that's a ridiculously cruel joke ah monarchical vision i'm going to stand outside and pass judgment upon this thing that i can see without bias now again this is a this is a tremendously powerful thing that we do but we should remember what we are doing when we're doing it because just like all these other visions we always we can't see the seer and now we're making judgments as the seer but we're not seeing ourselves as the seer when we're making these judgments okay and you know if this is let's say that this is a deterministic universe and that some parents remember this is an hour and 15 minutes after sam or after brett was going to take this off the table so they wouldn't keep tripping on it somewhere can't help but listen in to this podcast and then they lose a child and they end up burying the child on that hill and they end up thinking you mean that child was only ever a cruel joke but if you're looking at it from this view that child was only ever a combination of molecules it's in the it's in the manifest image that you love that child that that child ought not to die that that child ought to live a long life and enjoy life and reproduce and all of those things are function of the manifest image again go all the way back to daniel bonavax observation from wilford cellars that the thing that distinguishes these two universes are are ought normativity there's no ought in the death of a child in the scientific that child ought to die which that word makes no sense in that vision of the world it only makes sense in the manifest vision brett wants to have these two together that that that child was never there was no possibility of it becoming a person i would think that person standing on that hill would have a right to be have a right we're we're there's a lot of stuff in this image in our judgments looking down at things there's a lot of stuff that again going back to christian smith and what we know about how americans i'm viewing this as an american yeah you are how americans view morality it's self-evident is it what do you what are we smuggling into our moral judgments and our value judgments i might share them with him but we should at least take a look back and look at the eye and the ought and which i were looking at the world through here resentful of a universal of a universe in which that was the only option in a way that bad luck okay but there's so i mean why why cash in your chips there i mean there's so there's so many other reasons to be resentful of the universe this is an excellent point sam is making even if you think there are degrees of this universe even if you think there are massive degrees of freedom and and this is i think part of why sam harrison not an idiot he's a smart guy and he's very articulate and he's very articulate when it talks when he talks in these terms he's very compelling this is i think part of why he's so popular he can do this really well even if he doesn't understand what he's doing with his patch and there's there are different ways to interpret even that moment like a cruel joke is just one provincial framing to put on the nature of reality that when when a million are available one provincial framing that's an interesting choice of words right let's try another one that i think maybe it hits more squarely on the head you use you're not going to get there brett in i think the moral landscape maybe not sure one of your books you use the example of locked in syndrome this is a situation in which somebody's conscious mind is awake and functioning normally but they are left with no power to communicate with the outside world or act in any way they can't raise a limb or anything like that truly one of the most frightening things that could happen to a person especially in light of the fact that the outside world might be unaware that that is what has happened to you yeah and in previous periods in history would have certainly been aware certainly would have been unaware that that was what was happening to you yeah absolutely as terrifying as it gets yeah i believe that we are all in some sense in that syndrome if we are in a completely deterministic university oh there's got a powerful vision of the meaning crisis and yet have something that functions as a consciousness if we are absolutely trapped on a trajectory and there's no hope of in any way deviating it we are conscious minds trapped as conscious minds on trajectories in which consciousness has essentially no meaning other than yeah but they well before sam gets back let's take a look at back to david bentley harvick okay let's let's take a look at this article again and the paragraph that i read i want to reread it and then i want to read some more because it pertains very much to the meaning crisis conversation the entire notion of consciousness as an illusion is of course rather silly and at this point in the conversation with brett and sam rather depressing dan yet has been making the argument for most of his career and it's just as abrasively counterintuitive enough to create the strong suspicion in many that it must be more philosophically cogent than it seems surely because surely no one would say such a thing if there were not some subtle and penetrating truth behind its apparent absurdity and terrifying nature next paragraph for what it is worth daniel denett often exhibits considerable ingenuity in his evasions as does sam harris so much ingenuity in fact that he sometimes seems to have succeeded in baffling even himself for example for instance at one point in takes up the question of zombies we're back to zombies isn't that interesting the possibility of apparently perfectly functioning human beings who nevertheless possess no interior effective effective world at all but in doing so seem to have entirely forgotten that the whole question of consciousness actually is he rejects the very notion that we have privileged access to the causes and sources of our introspective convictions this of course if you go back to the lying conversation is exactly what sam harris's assertions about lying are dependent upon that we have privileged access to the causes and sources of our introspective convictions which is in fact what the psychotherapist notes um sam i sit in a room all day long and talk to people who seem to really have very little clue about what's going on inside of them that's how we are that's how that's how we really are and so on one hand you've got this enormously naive view of lying and on the other hand you flip around and say but the whole world is in fact zombified as though knowledge of the causes of consciousness were somehow germane to the issue of knowledge of the experience of consciousness and if you believe that you know you are not a zombie unwittingly imagining that you that you have real consciousness with real qualia denitz replies occur no you don't because you see the only support for that conviction is the vehemence of the conviction itself it is hard to know how to answer the argument without mockery it is quite amazing how thoroughly denit seems to have lost the thread for one thing a zombie could not unwittingly imagine anything since he would possess no consciousness at all let us let alone reflective consciousness that is the whole point of the imaginative exercise so insofar as you are convinced of anything at all whether vehemently or tepidly do you in fact know with absolute certainty that you yourself are not a zombie nor does it matter whether you know where your convictions come from it is it is the very state of having convictions as such that apprises you of your intrinsic intentionality and your irreducibly private conscious experience simple enough you cannot suffer the illusion that you are conscious because illusions are possible only for conscious minds that's the whole point of an illusion that it's your consciousness is being fooled this is so incandescently obvious that it is almost embarrassing to have to state it classic david bentley art but this confusion is entirely typical of denit's position in his book as he does repeatedly in previous texts he mistakes the question of the existence of subjective experience for the entirely irrelevant question of the objective accuracy of subjective experience and whether we need to appeal to a third person observers to confirm our impressions but of course all that matters for this for this discussion is that we have impressions at all okay let's get back to to let's get back to our point of locked in syndrome things we don't know how good the movie is going to get meaning conscious minds on trajectories in which consciousness has essentially no meaning other than yeah but the thing is we don't know how good the movie is going to get and when he says this it's like wow you yell at christians for being hopeful about life in another world about a two-world mythology well your eschatology is simply future within this frame and in fact if you want to give away imagination for a future life that is better than this one um a new body in a new world is way better than well you know maybe social security won't run out of money and maybe i will have a nice retirement except i'm going to be old and fat after eating all that ice cream or maybe i'll just be tired and have blown out knees out of exercising all the time so don't know how good the future is going to be we're locked in syndrome it says yeah but wait a minute maybe we'll develop soma so you can lay on the couch and they can put you on that soma drip and everything will be dandy maybe we'll invent a new kind of cocaine that's a little bit slower that can just keep us in that happy place in fact in just about every day i talk to alcoholics who just they're really working to just try and get that level of intake constant so it doesn't disrupt too much of their life so that they can just stay drunk all the time because it's the it's the qualia so on the other hand the real world is that we're trapped in our body but the good news is hey maybe it'll be cool that meaning conscious minds on trajectories in which consciousness has essentially no meaning other than yeah but the thing is we don't know how good the movie is going to get right we're the movie right and it's and it could already be shot but we the final scene could just be the the most spectacular firework display it could be could not only be that's the best you got sam and what about all of these people that have lived long hard lives in this world without any realistic hope for comfort and the best you got is well maybe the movie will get better stranger than we imagine it could be stranger than we can imagine right that that seems to me and i know you know you're you're none of these things but it seems to me solipsistic and hedonistic and no no no you forget about it's not mere pleasure it just it could be it's not mere pleasure let's just have more words that say things that are higher up our value hierarchy than pleasure it could be let's let's imagine in your locked-in syndrome in the movie suddenly you have meaning and it's sort of like john mcward talking to glenn laurie and saying there's a soundtrack that's and well there we are you know just just inscribe your deepest creative values in the space provided but just without the freedom to do otherwise right but then and and and religious people are making stuff up whatever it is having been scripted since the beginning of the movie is not a consequence of anything to which i might ascribe cause it just simply happens and so my delight at the fact that i don't know what's going to happen and would know is it's simply about somatic experience over which there's no possibility that it could ever have been other i mean again i just i think every word here loses its meaning well it's it's not it's not just somatic experience it's the life of the mind as well right it's just whatever it you know i see us as functioning in a a landscape of mind where we don't now this is fascinating functioning in a landscape of mind i thought the scientific vision this is the this is the world that we're functioning in but fortunately now we're functioning in a landscape of mind don't know what experiences are possible yeah right we know we know that we know the ones we've had and we can we can form intuitions about what should be and sam would say i'm religious adjacent to us in mental space right and what might be available to more insightful or more intelligent or longer-lived minds than our own right we can we can form we can you know we can get our science fiction writers to tell us good stories about what might be possible we're going to dismiss the bible because it's an immoral fiction we're going to get our scientific writers to write us some new ones we can derange our our own nervous systems by various methods but okay but what is derangement because you need to know what the straight line is in order to try to undirange your wobbly trapped in movie experience you know which again which are relate to your example of you know pursuing some you know chaos producing you know algorithm where we decide to take vacations at you know at the roll of the dice and then see what happens we can as you said i don't know why he keeps going back to the chaos thing because that's not at all where brett comes in with any of this stuff sam keeps bringing that into the conversation i don't know why we can take psychedelics we can we can practice meditation we can confront you know we can go to church we can do hymns sayings we can have a an ecstatic experience we can have a charismatic experience where do you get your ought to to yell at all the religious people the moral frame now remember moral doesn't come from this eye moral comes from this eye and that's the one you're talking out of right now collide with other cultures who have you know very different norms than we do and just see what see what that moves around in our minds but um you know you can go to burning man and and be surprised by things you find there and but don't go to church the net result of all of that is kind of pushing into again this could all be just dominoes falling right okay but switch eyes this could all just be dominoes falling but and i don't see how adding randomness to that fundamentally changes the picture let's say it's let's say it's just again back to the randomness plus the the wind gusts of random is random is random in this we're pushing into a space that we know must exist in potential you know it's like whether whether at the end of the day there is simply what happens there's this apparent sense that at the end of the day there is simply what happens there's this apparent sense that there are all kinds there's an infinite number of things that that could conceivably happen from well you know what you know what's probably going to happen sam you're going to get older stuff's going to break down your kids are going to get in trouble this is what happens it's the way life works sam i mean now you're the one saying christians are making up fancy stories about the future at least if you use whole cloth you can have lots of really nice stories of the future that you can be locked into and imagine what do you have to offer most of the people of the world what do you have to offer the freddys of the world this is this is this is the point that i get angry because i deal with people all the time and i'm not going to and i was just dealing with daniel yesterday and you know says to me at one point says you know what i'm a drunk yeah you are daniel you're a drunk you're an alcoholic and you show no desire to get off the alcohol and the best that you can do is try and keep yourself just drunk enough so that you don't feel too much and you're already in your your daniel turns 60 next month you don't have much body left talk about who's rational and who's not rational and how many people are living sam harris's life in this world and how many people are living daniel's life and this point from the from the point of view of the present and we don't know which of those things will in fact you know undergo the the the formality of actually becoming so uh and so that is a path that is a a path of psychological discovery whether or not freedom is real right you're remember when i said to put a flag in it right here right here when he's talking about these naive libertarians that imagine their people and all of that stuff that all of that stuff that they're imagining so again we begin the conversation and tell the truth everyone should tell the truth because you know the truth just tell it oops wrong eye you know the truth just tell it oh do i well and then those those libertarians a dyslexic should not do this those libertarians those libertarians think that we're people and we're out there choosing and that's so naive and and brett's like yeah that's kind of naive because we're probably got less you know when we see the ice cream it's like fat and sugar i want it but but deep down inside brett says oh there's a there's a way that we can choose to become better people and sam's like nope we're gonna play this game and so now those silly libertarians who imagine that they're people and that's just that's just that's that's non-scientific we can't know that you're you're pushing you're you're in the woods and you don't know what's in there with you and you're exploring right that is a psychologically a thrilling and scary have you ever been lost in the woods sam i'm a dyslexic i get lost a lot now i don't get too bothered by it because at this point i've always been able to get un-lost at one point but you know lost in the woods is not fun psychologically now now brett's gonna call him on this and beautiful experience and it doesn't matter oh i'm lost in the woods i might starve how's this movie going to end or if it's a screensaver well i i get i think i understand what you're saying but here's what i feel like it implies i feel like you and actually other people who i've encountered who have made a an argument for full determinism i feel like the model is that the world is fully deterministic up to the border of psychology and that you're actually able to observe and of course everybody who would make an argument in favor of full determinism understands that there's nothing in observation that is absent from the full deterministic model but i feel like the okay did you catch that because that's a really important little comment he made there because if you're fully determined and your psychological experiences are dependent upon all of these mechanisms that have all been determined your psychology is determined too that's a point brett keeps wanting to make that if you look out of both eyes your psychology is determined too because your psychology that says oh i want to eat ice cream because of fat and sugar or i don't want to eat ice cream because i want to impress this this this boy or this girl because i don't want to be too fat well it's all determined it's the whole show so your psychology is determined too and so sam when you on one hand you say well it's all determined out there but psychologically it can be wonderful and it's like well the the you want there to be one world the manifest image is on top of the scientific image and it's all locked down but it's a pretty rational guy things that you say relative to meaning observation doesn't matter if it's a screensaver because it's still beautiful and fascinating to you that all of that more or less assumes a mind that is independent of complete determinism trapped in a world that is completely deterministic so that there you've got the locked in syndrome and the meaning crisis right there the the human being it has no meaningful ability to deviate anything but it's still functioning in a way that you can appreciate whereas i would say the word appreciate has zero meaning you know does well no the the okay now go back and and what happens when daniel denett gets in a corner this is exactly what sam harris does now this is exactly the moment at which brett weinstein just came down with a really huge logical argument put it right in front of sam what's sam gonna do no the the appreciation is still mere mechanism in your pictures but it feels a certain way right so and like i didn't so it's an illusion but it's it's an illusion that we like what about the illusions that we don't i didn't author my preference for beauty over ugliness right but finding that i have one becomes actionable right again and to the degree to which actionable i'm moved by it or if it flips tomorrow is again something i can't account for but there's still this experience of being suddenly presented with something that you didn't see a moment ago and finding it beautiful and there's no place you don't have to justify that from you don't have to stand outside of that mechanism to justify it to make it actionable sounds like a hedonist you just it's just it's just there right it's just a locket but a hedonist at least has the ability to pursue pleasure sam's just locked in and well i hope the movie gets better than this and if not i can kill myself ah but that's action two and key that that you keep you know marrying and twisting again and again and they change right in this picture you're describing a circumstance in which the mechanism is acting through means that are utterly bizarre if they don't mean what they appear to me so the fact that i am speaking to you by vibrating the air molecules between us in such a way that they vibrate a membrane in the side of your head which then causes hate now now back to sam's trying to employ the scientific image air is in a canal to flop over such that you can deduce the abstract meaning in my mind and build a version of it in your own mind that's such an odd way if i say hey pass the salt and i'm doing this through this utterly magical mechanism of vibrating air molecules between you and me right and the purpose is to get the salt from your side of the table to my side of the table what a mundane thing to happen in a universe by such an odd means why am i able to put an abstract thought into your mind from across the room no no no one ever said this wasn't strange it's everything is strange no i think it's a posture i think it's like saying that a coastline gets longer as you measure it more closely but i mean this is the this is the joke you know people say life is strange but you know i say compared to what i don't know who this is randy newman or somebody but the what and then they're going to go into don hoffman and and this is this has gone on long enough basic questions is purpose real or illusory the purpose is that we know illusion as david bentley hart points out is the only problem is only a problem in a frame of purposeful willful conscious agency illusion is a function of lying which again ironically where this whole thing started sam just keeps switching eyes is the universe finally willfully personal or blind impersonal and this is where you get are we a screensaver well did someone do the screensaver i'm really offended imagining i'm a screensaver and i want to get back into the met the question of the meta divine realm or god and but morality then comes into focus because morality is always a function of value and value is not in the scientific image value is part of again the manifest image will purpose outcome rationality it's all in there there is will behind both of the eyes we developed the scientific image in order to purpose colonize the world of group a there is no purpose to live in that world because there's no purpose in that world it's just stuff it's just math purpose was already taken out of it by us by definition when we made it go back to david bentley hart and francis bacon go back to daniel bonevac and manifest in scientific image the real world well when we say the scientific image is the real world well that's a world that we have made remember we made that world we made that vision we constructed it in a certain way with assumptions in a certain way so that we ourselves could achieve and colonize the group a world in certain ways we involve we invoke by it now the meaning crisis because we're concerned that we ourselves might be part of that world we have a purpose crisis and as brett imagines multiple times we willful agents self-transcend to pass judgment on the deterministic vision and discover that we don't exist and so we don't want it which in a sense leads us all the way back to a very ancient story where there's a man and a woman in a perfect garden and well there's a tree of the knowledge of good and evil and there's a serpent that speaks to them we want to know good and evil we want to be choosers in fact we created the entire we uncrated and we employ the scientific image in order to choose outcomes the limbic system the master and its emissary what is the master the master is the wanting creature what is the emissary the one that creates the scientific vision to try to organize the world and achieve the outcomes we want and brett says oh but sam there's there's no achieving that in this world but sam says maybe the movie will get better it's a great conversation we're not clear on what we've chosen and we're really concerned that what we're killing is ourselves again go back to c.s lewis's the abolition of man because once we have eliminated ourselves from the picture what have we left this has gone on well quite a while again bravo to the two of them for what they've done it's a good conversation the most interesting part of the conversation is to come and i so want to make a video that's entitled if christianity is an iron age religion then sam harris has a stone age sex life because brett tags him with that right at the beginning of the conversation says why don't you have more children which is a very reasonable thing to ask from an evolutionary biology standpoint and brett goes off covering his scientific eye into all the other conversations well i love my wife and i don't lie and all of these things yeah but brett's saying yeah but but that take the hand off your eye and try and look through both and that's as david bentley hart says that's where things start getting interesting that sam just keeps doing this so let's see don't lie it's all determined free will is illusory but the movie might get better but it's just a movie and you're trapped anyway so i'll probably post this on monday i've got to record my rough draft for sunday because i got to preach this week and thanks for watching