https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mVojm-sPJW0

 Hi, this is Paul and I'm at home doing a video from my backyard because a craigslist is supposed to come and I had a miscommunication with my wife as to whether or not she was going to be here. So there might be some wind noise, there might be some airplanes, I might have to stand up and help sell a bed and I'm wearing a hat so that the top of my head doesn't get sunburned. But let's do this thing. What good is... Oh, this is Rough Draft for Sunday and Rough Draft for Sunday is where I walk through the current version of my sermon, the current draft that it's in. And I've been preaching through the book of second Kings and starting to get some comments from my congregation about how long we're going to be in the Old Testament. And I want to say, hey, you know what, that's part of the Bible too. So don't be, don't be New Testament bigots. Anyway, what good is God if he doesn't show up when you need him? Now a big cause of people walking away from the faith and of church is God not showing up. Some bad thing, some painful thing happened and they had asked God to deliver them. They prayed to God for help and help didn't come. And that pretty much taught them God is unreliable. God doesn't work. God won't show up. If God is of no practical purpose, then why give him any of your thought or attention? And this in fact is behind a great deal of unbelief. And when I listened to Sam Harris or others who aren't Christians, they look at Christians and they say, well, you silly Christians, you pray and you think when things happen, you attribute it to God. And then if it goes the other way, then you give God an excuse. It's all a big, it's all a big game. Well, church people want to say things like prayer works, but then they've got as many problems as anyone else. So does prayer work? And then you get into this whole game of social sciences, asking whether Christians who pray for healing get well in the hospital and if Christians are happier and so far so on and so forth. And so for many people, ditching the faith is one disappointment away. It's one disappointment away from looking for a new God or looking for a new religious service provider. You know, if Pastor VanderKlay's prayers don't get me what I need, maybe Reverend Osteen's prayers will get me what I need. And Pastor VanderKlay promises that you'll suffer in life. And Reverend Osteen says, you can have your best life now. I better go to Reverend Osteen's church. Look at how big his church and how small Pastor VanderKlay's church is. Pastor Osteen, he must be right. So we're just, people are just one disappointment away from chucking the whole thing or just going through the motions. And we're one disappointment away from only trusting in myself and my own resources to make life work. Now we've been going through the book of second kings and a couple of weeks ago we talked about King Ahaz of the southern kingdom of Judah. And the northern kingdom was not yet destroyed. We talked about that last week. And the kingdom of northern Israel and Aram were bearing down on King Ahaz. And they were, they were taking out cities and villages. They were raiding and robbing and, and King Ahaz didn't have enough military strength to stop him. So what he did was he invited, he paid the Assyrian empire to save his hide. And the Assyrians came down and they destroyed the, the kingdom of the Arameans of Syria. They took Damascus, set up their altar there to their god Hadad. Now it's interesting, Ben Hadad was commonly the name of the king of Syria, the son of Hadad. Hadad was clearly a regional, a regional deity like Baal and Molech and some of the others. So, so the, the, the Judean bribe paid off and I'm sure it wasn't just that bribe. Assyria had decided to move in and stay and, and, and take up permanent residence right down there in Aram and Israel when they did this. So, so Ahaz, king of Judah, sacrificed his son on the altar, which we talked about two weeks ago, and he built an altar to the Assyrian god Hadad. And he encouraged the nation, he encouraged the nation to be very spiritual in all the high places and to get the gods to help. And the authors of the book of second Kings weren't too happy about this. Yeah, as we read in the book of Isaiah, the Lord invited him. Isaiah the prophet invited him to trust in the Lord rather than the Assyrian empire and Ahaz declined with a sanctimonious excuse. Now Judah survived, north Israel did not. And last week we saw how Israel had long stopped being Israel and they came and they became just like all the other nations until they were just another nation. And this gets back into the question of the legitimacy of God's mission in the Old Testament, back to Abraham where he would make from Abraham a people and by this people he would reveal himself to the world and the world would be saved through them. And then you have the question, can God make a holy people for himself that is like himself? And that's a difficult question because we are not naturally like God and you'd say, well, what is God like? How should you know? While we're talking about the God as he reveals himself in the Bible, this is the God that Christians and Jews of the Old Testament, this is the God that they believe in. And this God is different supposedly from the way this world works. The way this world works is kiss up and kick down. And the way this world works is my well-being at the expense of those who are weaker. And what that means is that the way this world works is that what you practice in your temple or at your center in your heart will be played out in the streets. And this is how the Lord God of Israel wants Israel to be different and how she gives her his laws and how Israel was supposed to be a light unto the nations. They were supposed to be a priesthood, a nation of priests so that the rest of the world could come to God. And Israel for the most part just seemed to want to be just like the other nations and that's exactly what Ahaz was doing. And so what we see in the story of the Bible is again and again this entire mission of God seems to come to a grinding halt. It seems to get to a bad end and we imagine even God can't rescue this miserable rebellious people from themselves. But then there's a surprise. The son of Ahaz is Hezekiah. In the third year of Hoshiah son of Elah king of Israel, Hezekiah son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign. He was 25 years old when he became king and he reigned in Jerusalem 29 years. His mother's name was Abijah daughter of Zechariah. He did what was right in the eyes of the Lord just as his father David had done. He removed the high places smashed the sacred stones and cut down the Asherah poles. So he took out the the cult of Baal and he reduced this freelance worship of the Lord that had been going on in the high places. He broke into pieces the bronze snake Moses had the Moses had made for up to that time the Israelites had been burning incense to it. So even this bronze serpent that had come down from the stories in the book of Numbers he smashed that and so he was a zealous reformer for worshiping only God and worshiping only God in the authorized way at the temple. Hezekiah trusted in the Lord the God of Israel. There was no one like him among all the kings of Judah except before either before him or after him and this is kind of the way the book of Kings talks about an exemplary character. He held fast to the Lord it did not stop following him. He kept the commands the Lord had given Moses and the Lord was with him and he was successful in whatever he undertook. He rebelled against the king of Assyria which Ahaz had basically become a tributary to the king of Assyria and become its vassal and here Hezekiah rebels. Now this is going to be risky. So he rebelled against the king of Assyria and did not serve him from the watchtower to the fortified city. He defeated the Philistines as far as Gaza and its territory. Now if you look at this with a political or a nationalist bend you can see that what Hezekiah basically does is probably reinforces Judean nationalism and decides to no longer be the vassal of Assyria and so rejects the gods of Assyria and rejects the ways of Assyria and rallies his people along the lines of their their the god of their ancestry and the god of their history. So you can see this in a in a through a variety of filters and through a variety of ways and so Hezekiah is undertaking a very vigorous religious reform a very vigorous nationalist policy and if you read other histories you can see that at this point as is often the case in this part of the world Assyria is struggling with some internal changes including leadership changes Egypt is trying to reassert itself and Hezekiah sees an opportunity to throw off the yoke of Assyria to get out from under her and to purify their own national religion and become exclusively like the lord in ways that they had been corrupted before under his father Ahaz. In King Hezekiah's fourth year which was the seventh year of Hoshiah son of Elah king of Israel Shalmaneser king of Assyria marched against Samaria and laid siege to it. At the end of three years the Assyrians took it so Samaria was captured in Hezekiah's sixth year which was the ninth year of Hoshiah king of Israel that's the way they told time that's basically instead of giving like dates of such and such BC or AD they always told time in the in the years of the king which gives you the idea of why Anno Domini and before Christ come because Jesus is the king of kings that's how those dates got going and and what we've inherited basically comes along the lines of those things. The king of Assyria deported Israel to Assyria and settled them in Hala and goes on on the Haber river and in the towns of the Medes this happened because they had not obeyed the lord their god but had violated his covenant all that Moses the servant of the lord commanded they neither listened to the commands nor carried them out. In the 14th year of King Hezekiah this is obviously a few years later Sennacherib king of Assyria after a leadership transition attacked all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them so Hezekiah king of Judah sent this message to the king of Assyria and Lachish I have done wrong withdraw from me I will pay you whatever you demand uh-oh Hezekiah rebelled but now it's coming he's coming to pay and so he the king of Assyria exacted from Hezekiah king of Judah 300 talents of silver and 30 talents of gold so Hezekiah gave him all the silver that was found in the temple of the lord and the treasuries of the royal palace at this time Hezekiah king of Judah stripped off the gold with which he had covered the doors and door posts of the temple of the lord and gave it to the king of Assyria this doesn't look like a good thing for king Hezekiah the king of Assyria sent his supreme commander his chief officer and his field commanders with a large army from Lachish to king Hezekiah at Jerusalem they came up to Jerusalem and stopped at the aqueduct of the upper pool on the road to the washerman's field and they called for the king and Eliakim the son of Hilkiah the palace administrator and Shebna the secretary and Jonah son of Asaph the recorder went out to them the field commander said to them tell Hezekiah this is what the great king the king of Assyria says on what are you basing this confidence of yours you say you have the council and the might for war but you speak only in empty words on whom are you depending that you rebel against me look i know you are depending on egypt that splintered reed of a staff which pierces the hand of anyone who leans on it such as pharaoh king of egypt to all who depend on him if you say to me we are depending on the lord our god isn't he the one whose high places and altars has a kaya removed saying to judah in jerusalem you must worship before this altar in jerusalem this is very interesting and you can see that this language can help you frame and understand the context the cultural context in which they are imagining how the kings serve and how the kings are proxies for the gods and and and the way politics and religion are one thing you can see how basically this emissary of assyria is sowing in the minds of jerusalem how how foolish of you to abandon the the flourishing of individual spirituality and religiosity and and this again is the ancient world politics and religion are one thing and your empire will crumble if your people aren't paying enough attention to the gods and getting the spiritual power from the gods now obviously in contemporary secular situations people flip this script but this is you know if you are an ancient king you are highly religious in fact you were hyper religious you were more religious and you worked the gods and this was the system that that was a winning strategy and it was this system that made that made basically your country win the more religious the nation the more victorious you were in the battlefield and you can find this these positions echoed throughout the world of its day now come make a bargain with my master the king of assyria i will give you 2 000 horses if you can put riders on them he's just haunting him he's saying you don't even have 2 000 soldiers to mount these horses i'll give you the chance to fight me and even then you won't how can you repulse one officer of the least of my master's officials our heroes are greater than your heroes our champions make your this is this is you can see what this this is trash talking this happens on every nba basketball court even though you are depending on egypt for chariots and horsemen furthermore i have come to attack and destroy this place without word from the lord the lord himself told me to march against this country and destroy it oh my so even god is on their side this guy is well he's the best of the best he works for the he works for the great emperor and and juda now they're cornered in jerusalem they're they're they're nothing they're mince meat hezekiah's faith is bogus hezekiah's trust is unfounded hezekiah's claim on the lord the god of israel even that is now called into question then eli then eliah kim son of hilkiah and shabna and and joah saw said to the field commander please speak to your servants in aramaic since we understand it don't speak to us in hebrew in the hearing of the people on the wall please please don't don't don't make our job worse by mocking us in front of the what's left of juda cowering behind the walls of jerusalem but the commander replied was it only to your master that you and my master sent me to say these things and not only to the people sitting on the wall i think about the mouth of sauron as he emerges in the return of the king and in in the lord of the rings movie this is exactly the kind of figure that this is who like you will have to eat their own excrement and drink their own urine this we know what's going on behind those walls we know how desperate this is then the commander stood and called out in hebrew hear the word of the great king i thought great king was what the lord was who's the great king assyria is the great king the king of assyria this is what the king says do not let hezekiah deceive you he cannot deliver you from my hand do not let hezekiah persuade you to trust in the lord when he says the lord will surely deliver us this city will not be given into the hand of the king of assyria do not listen to hezekiah this is what the king of assyria says make peace with me and come out to me each of you will eat fruit from your own vine and drink drink and vine and fig tree and drink water from your own cistern until i come and take you to a land like your own i've got another land flowing with milk and honey i'm just going to move you around a little bit by the order of the king of assyria a land of grain and new wine a land of bread and vineyards a land of olive trees and honey the places i bring you will be better than this dry mountainous land you have here choose life and not death do not listen to hezekiah for he is misleading you when he says the lord will deliver us has the king of ever as the god of any nation ever delivered his land from the hand of the king of assyria see politics and religion it's all one where are the gods of hama or arpad where are the gods of zefar vein of henna and eva have they rescued samaria from my hand the lord that was supposed to be his country too right and and samaria is gone the gods of assyria are the best and assyria is a winner and if you're smart you'll join with a winner you'll kill hezekiah you'll revolt in the city you'll open the doors and you'll let us be your new overlords and we'll give you the life you've always wanted has anything really changed but the people remained silent and said nothing in reply because the king had commanded do not answer him who right there test what will the people do is it the consent of the governed that determines what they will do is that such a new idea then eliah kim son of hilkiah the palace administrator shibna the secretary and joah son of asaf the recorder went to hasekiah with their clothes torn it's a show of remorse and told him what the field commander had said when hasekiah heard this he tore his clothes and put off sackcloth and went into the temple of the lord he sent elec he sent eliah kim the palace administrator shibna the secretary and the leading priests all wearing sackcloth to the prophet isaiah son of amos it's the same prophet that was there during usiah they are doing ahaz isaiah is already an old man obviously a very famous prophet you'll find the book of isaiah in the old testament they told him this is what easy as it this is what hasekiah says this day is a day of distress and rebuke and disgrace as when children come to the moment of birth and there is no strength to deliver them talk about a vivid word picture now for those listening to the jordan peterson conversation the the video i just made talking about jordan peterson and sam harris and and jordan peterson at occam how we take these how we take these these narratives and we boil them down into stories and here we take these and we boil them down into proverbs and into word pictures and into metaphor and he and hasekiah just lays a potent one here the day that the children hasekiah sees himself he's been trying to rebirth this renaissance for juda and for the lord and and here it was all going to come to pass and kingdom was going to come again and here is assyria snatching it away it may be that the lord your god will hear all the words of the field of the field commander whom his master the king of assyria has sent to ridicule the living god and that he will rebuke him for the words maybe god will act maybe therefore pray for the remnant that still survives just us huddled few struggling in the city when king hasekiah's official came to isaiah isaiah said to them tell your master this is what the lord says do not be afraid of what you have heard those words which the underlings of the king of assyria have blasphemed me listen when he hears a certain report i will make him want to return home to his own country and there i will have him cut down with the sword and from there isaiah goes quite a while he's pretty long-winded if you've ever read the book of isaiah you'll see that so i'm going to skip part of that just for the sake of time and a bunch of stuff other happens and then basically the the assyrians they don't they don't back down they say well we're going to leave now to go and handle something a minute because you know egypt is kicking up its heels but but we'll be back and we'll take you out don't don't you don't you doubt it so hasekiah receives the letter from the messenger and reads it and he spread it out in the temple of the lord and spread it out before the lord and hasekiah prayed to the lord lord the god of israel and thrown between the chair of him you alone are god over all the kingdoms of the earth you have made heaven and earth give ear lord and hear open your eyes lord and see listen to the word sanak rim has sent to ridicule the living god this is that moment this is that moment when everything you thought was a god-shaped dream seems like it's going to fall apart this is that moment when you're at your wits end and maybe you don't even hardly believe in god but what's it gonna hurt what does it cost me this is the this is the this is the moment that even atheists in foxholes pray if they do it is true lord that the assyrian king have laid waste to these nations and these lands they have thrown their gods into the fire and destroy them for they were not gods but only wood and stone fashioned by human hands now lord our god deliver us from his hand so that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you alone lord are god this is the old testament mission of god this is the reason given for the plagues this is the reason step by step that god would show his glory and in a sense hasekiah is coming to god and saying hey your name is on the line as much as mine your mission is on the line as much as mine will you show up that night the angel of the lord went out and put to death a hundred and eighty five thousand in the assyrian camp when the people got up the next morning they were all dead bodies so tenet sinakrib king of assyria broke camp and withdrew he returned to ninova and stayed there one day while he was worshiping in the temple of the of his god nisrak his sons adramelik and sharaz sharazez killed him with the sword and they escaped to the land of erarat and as hadon his son succeeded him as king killed by his own family now now skeptics will say well you know this is just all made up okay well imagine it isn't made up well you can still say well you know we know even as late as the civil war disease killed way more people than who actually died in combat the disease came by and so the people associated that with the angel of the lord and of course hezekiah would be praying in his temple he scared to death a religious man everyone was religious back then that's of course this isn't proof of anything okay fair enough not proof in anything but if we're going to again i don't know if i'm going to put this in the sermon or not but if we're going to apply the jordan peterson stuff to this it's probably also true that people who believed in god fought harder than people who were just fighting for their own individual family and people who believed in god had stories and they had artwork and they had poetry and they had tradition and so it's quite likely that nations that believed in a god even any god even in a made up god outperformed nations that didn't believe in any god well we could probably say that with some historical justification because there weren't any nations that didn't believe in any god they all got killed so darwin killed the atheists early on and it's only here in late stage christianity that atheists managed to win because as nicha said christianity killed its god at its at at his own hand and so the only reason atheists even live because in the ancient world the atheists wouldn't have survived because all of the the god believing people all the people who believed even and made up gods according to christians and jews out survived people who didn't believe in any god that might be something you want to consider as an atheist that's just a little side note so here it seems god wins we like this story god worked allegiance and faithfulness were rewarded but we live our lives in moments of consciousness and we are tested in these moments and we see christian people die just like non-christian people we see christian people pray for cancer and their prayers aren't answered and they're not delivered from cancer and we see christian people suffer we look at what's going on around in around the world in places like nigeria christian people getting persecuted and in other islamic lands and in china the christian church being persecuted patience is tested just believing in god does not mean our prayers are answered by yes and we get what we want and yeah the bible comes around the backside it says ah yeah we got that covered faith is tested revived refined and strengthened and i believe all that stuff i've experienced that in my life so jesus disciples see him taken and peter said he'd never allow it and he strikes the servant of and he strikes the servant of the high priest and jesus heals the servant and goes willingly and in the in his trial and his hearing before pilot jesus doesn't even make a plea to get off jesus doesn't even defend himself this man that had power to still a storm certainly could have made a storm this man who had power to raise the dead certainly could have made soldiers dead this man who had power to cure the blind certainly had power to make people blind for as long as we've had pointed sticks we've known how to make people blind but we still can't cure the blind if you can cure the blind you could make people blind with a word but he doesn't and then on the cross he cries out my god my god why have you forsaken me you see in these times everyone's a theologian jesus' enemies say see god didn't deliver him he was unrighteous the king of assyria says some area crumpled you're going to crumple and yeah a few hundred years later the babalones will take jerusalem and they'll destroy the temple the romans will do it a few hundred years after that today we say god isn't real all there is is military political and economic power the suffering believer wonders does he hear will he deliver he doesn't always deliver do we know that he always hears so what does the resurrection mean and what are the stakes on the resurrection did jesus rise from the dead what if he didn't well in a sense what if he didn't then christians are stupid losers in history and as paul says in first corinthians 15 we're the biggest idiots around you might wonder why the idiocy captured the roman empire you might listen to tom tom holland and think about caesar celebrating at least a million deaths and a million slaves and everyone being in rome saying the very rational thing yeah if there's killing enslaving to do we want to be the beneficiaries of it not the victims but what if he did how does that change the story so i ask my i ask you are you a mercenary believer do you believe the gods that work do you believe the gods that that basically make sense in the now of your consciousness do you believe the gods that follow through in your short-term memory i think we have a rash of that going on i think those are the kinds of marriages we're living those are the kinds of parental relationships and friend relationships we're having is there a relationship between every man for themselves and the weakness of your tribe well that seems pretty obvious well what can you develop your tribe around well there's nothing that seems more potent than religion well is it a true religion how will you know how will you test well you'll have to test it and what will testing involve testing involves going into a wilderness it goings in going into a land of uncertainty it involves going in on a belief that you have mere faith in and putting your life on the line well to what degree can you test it does a does a week do it does a month do it does a year do it is your allegiance to god in christ dependent on what you get out of it now or in what time frame what is this faith good for what can't you endure however if the opposite is true what can't you endure if you believe jesus now you might say well yeah but you know what are the limits of this no but here's the here's the point of this story it keeps pushing those limits it keeps asking you to go beyond in those limits and doesn't that enliven in part of you a portion of you that gets excited about the ambition now you're going to die either way and you might die when you're 40 you might die when you're 60 you might die when you're 80 you're probably not going to live long past 100 even no matter what ray curswheel says we are we can't replicate the mind of an of a of a worm much less download a human mind into machine within the time frame that any of us are living now it's not that we don't have the computing power we don't know ourselves and that is seems obvious by just dealing with even another human being that you know as well as you know a spouse or a child if you believe this story what can't you endure what what can you be faithful to what can you survive now take a darwinian approach isn't that what brought christianity to the top isn't that the struggles of empires isn't that the struggles of religion which religions which are in some ways empires without armies how many army how many tanks does the pope have remember who asked that question the papacy is still around not the soviet union not the nazi not nazi germany what loss can't he redeem what pain can't he turn to glory what fear can't he turn to joy