https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=j6Df6JmZJV8

 thing and I'll have started 30 minutes late and I'm like, oh man, I really wish I had the previous 30 minutes of this conversation because, you know, It happens all the time. It happens all the time. I'm pretty new to all of this. So it's kind of, I didn't realize how good the, you know, the lead up could be. And I also don't really know how like whenever you get into one of these kinds of things, like how quickly someone's expected to get into whatever you're going to be talking about, you know, it's like, it's like come in hot and then, you know, I find most people who are talking about this stuff on YouTube want to talk. And so they jump right in and off you go. So I do almost no editing on my channel. Just, there it is. If you want to watch it, watch it. I'm not going to leave anything out. All the ums, the uhs, the little, I mean, you get that in the New Testament with, you know. Get away, bring the parchments, Paul says. Yeah. Yeah, I do like that uncut like conversation style, you know, because it's like very, it's very authentic and like you can, I feel like it's more true and like you get more genuine conversations less scripted. It's like, I care more about that than like, it's kind of like, I think like, it's some version of like Plato's idea where like you act your beliefs out and like by that, he said something like, by a man's play, I'll deduce his philosophy or something like that, you know, where it's like, I like to see people in the real talking about what they believe as opposed to something they could spend, you know, who knows a year scripting out and then recording and like that kind of thing is more interesting to me. Well, maybe because you edit, you can edit this out, but why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? James from modern day debates, you know, had the hook up and so just tell me a little bit about yourself while you're doing a podcast and what it's about. And then after that, you can pepper me with questions. Yeah, absolutely. So, I mean, I kind of started, I started this my blog, which is called Tweaking Optimism. I started it, I guess you could say more officially a year ago, but I technically been working on something and some variation of it since 2014. And even maybe before then, it had gone through several iterations and name changes where I just like trying to write something, trying to like I couldn't really put my finger on what I wanted to do. And then finally, like I have a history of mental illness and then like same with my family, mental illness, substance abuse, et cetera, like it's very like peppered throughout my family. And then so is this like at least within the past two generations. So it's like sort of like philosophical inclination, psychological inclination, like this kind of like a tendency to like read big books for fun kind of thing. And and so like and that really began with my dad, who is like very well read and all that, which a slight caveat, he's actually I'm his caretaker and he's in the hospital. And so I may at some point have to take a phone call. OK. Yes. I don't know that that will happen, but just on the odd chance that the homeless person might knock at my door. So that's all the time. OK. Excellent. And so I was trying to in some sense like and so I also kind of grew up in like sort of a misfit crowd and then like those. So that kind of like physiological predisposition, like my own my own illnesses, illnesses common to my family, and then also like my intellectual predisposition to read books and think about things the way that I do. Kind of in one way, I felt coalesced, especially with like the stuff that you are doing and then kind of similar with like the stuff with like Jordan Peterson and then I believe John Verveke and like just like that sort of IDW sphere kind of like also was like precipitating. And I thought, oh, wow, you know, maybe the beliefs that I hold about the world affect the way that I feel and can affect like my ability to internalize things and understand things and interact with people. And so and then I began to notice more and more that like people were feeling like super like there's a general sense of meaninglessness, you know, like there's a general sense of like people are like, you know, I don't know what I'm here for. I think there's a common meme going on right now where like it's it says something like we're here to eat, sleep and be in pain until we die or something like that. And it's like I feel like there's there's very clearly so much more to that. But but but people, you know, like people resonate so much with it's got, I don't know, probably like half a million shares or something, you know, it's hard to tell how many times that's been shared or seen. But like just the one I saw had several hundred thousand likes or whatever, you know. And so I wanted to in some way address it, you know, maybe from like a personal level, but also from like talking with people who had I found like in my own life, looking at people who were who were I would consider admirable, you know, like who were like heroes essentially, you know, throughout history, you know, like or that they did something amazing, you know. And so like we don't know who's going to be doing amazing things right now, necessarily. Some people we do, we can very clearly see, oh, yeah, that guy was going to he's going to be in history books. But then there are other people who are more obscure, you know, like there is a poet who wrote this this poem called The Hound of Heaven. I don't know if you ever heard of that poem, but it's like super it's very, very popular poem. And that guy was like a homeless heroin addict, you know. And so it's like it's very difficult to know who is going to be that, you know, that next great poet or that next great physician or that next great insert discipline here, you know. And so it's like I just kind of treat every person as if they're that next big person and interview them and talk with them about the types of stuff that's going on, you know, because like it's people like and I'm drawing a blank on his name that wrote The Hound of Heaven, but it's kind of like I'll use other people's names like Soren Kierkegaard or, you know, Thomas Aquinas or C.S. Lewis or Tolkien or all these people who like did really, really difficult things, you know, or did and even did things under pain and suffering, you know, like the idea like that, like Tolkien and Lewis grew up in the World Wars and we're still riding under the threat of of of death, basically, you know. And I always think of C.S. Lewis's essay Learning in Wartime, where, you know, he's talking to young guys at college like, you know, it's still important to read books. It's still important to do your duty to, you know, to God and country kind of thing, like to actualize your gifts, you know. And and so that's kind of what why I started doing this. And also, it's kind of also in conjunction with I want to talk with people who are who are interesting and interested in similar things, because in my personal life, there are very few people who are like who are interested and willing to talk for one, two, three, four, five, six hours about any number of obscure things that I might be interested in or any number of, you know, books like that I might read. I have one friend that is that reads like I read. But apart from him, it's I, you know, like, for instance, where we were reading The Idiot by Dostoevsky and it's like, I don't know anybody. I don't know. You know, I don't know anyone else. I don't know anyone else that has read that book personally, you know. I don't know a single person who has read Dostoevsky or even knows who he was. Did you go to college? I'm in college right now, kind of. But since I'm my dad's caretaker, it's taken me a long time to do that because I well, I became his caretaker when I was 24. And well, I'm only 25 now, but it's like been an untraditional route. But even in college, even in college, I don't find anybody that's in the same vein of understanding, like or like is in the same vein of interests during a psychology degree. And I'd like to become a clinician myself, but even like the people that are in there in some sense, like a lot of them are very one track. And unfortunately, a lot of them are more like, I don't know what the word is, but like they're more just inclined to social justice than anything else for whatever reason, you know, like they are more interested in learning about how to diversify the field rather than further the field. And so it's like that's also like there's not a lot of good conversations. And then on top of that, right now, due to COVID, everything is online as well. Yeah. So I kind of just talked for a while, but I don't know. That's OK. That's OK. You're interested. Well, no, it is. Well, I'm always I got into this game. Well, so the complaint that you just made is very common because even if you go out on the Internet and you look at Reddit or Twitter, you can find lots of people who have read Plato or Kierkegaard and are interested in these things. But they're a small percentage of the population. And so they tend to be scattered and distributed and they can find each other on the Internet. And when Jordan, the Jordan Peterson wave came through, that wave sort of surfaced a lot of those people, especially around meaning issues. And people were quite frustrated because they they wanted conversation partners. And the Internet is sort of a way to do this. And with YouTube now, we kind of have a tool to find each other and to do these conversations in a better way than, let's say, if you and I were talking on the phone, this would be less rich. So that's I mean, this thing has sort of grown up because of the technology. But there, you know, there have long been people out there. And again, you can tend to find them in churches or universities, but not all churches. Obviously, a lot of churches are busy with other things. So there there have been ways that people have been able to find each other to have conversations about these kind of things. But it's not easy. The the portion of the population is small. So and that's so then I started a meetup and that's been cool. And YouTube channel. And that's been cool. So that's kind of how it went for me. Yeah, that that idea like that with the technology developing, like I had talked with someone about this where like even in my own case where it's like you like, for instance, I'm the only person in my environment that reads Kierkegaard, Aquinas, Dostoevsky, etc. And and previously that would that would just be it. I would never like unless I traveled somewhere, you know, to the university or traveled to, you know, wherever the wherever all of that was going on, you know, I would just be that would just be it. I would just be the only person there, you know, or likewise, like previously, like when you when people when kids were growing up playing football or sports or whatever, like there was no way to get on Instagram and see how good you were in comparison to two billion other people, you know, or how like I frequently kind of in some ways I freak out because when I go somewhere and I start reading with other people who have read these works, I'm like, oh, my gosh, I don't I literally how can I keep up with them? Like they're so how do I you know, I don't know half of what they know or I can't make half the references they make, you know, and like it freaks me out, you know. But in reality, it's like, I don't know one, I don't know what their profession is. They could literally this could be their I could be their job, you know, like to be they maybe they are a professor somewhere. And like that's what they do. And like in another case, they could be, you know, they could have been studying this. Maybe it's not their job, but maybe they're, you know, 80 years old and they've been reading this for 40 years. You know, it's like it's like very it's one of those things that's like it's that that comparison global comparison or the globalizing comparison is like I think it's a bad thing personally. But like it's also like it can be a good thing. I guess maybe we'll make more I guess technologically, it's good, but maybe like in some like. I don't know how you say maybe like humanistic or metaphysical way. It's bad ultimately, like to sort of like rap, make people progress more rapidly than what was previously considered natural. I don't know. But I guess the human being knows no bounds in some sense. Like, you know, like we kind of have been adjusting what Dostoevsky is like. I think it was Dostoevsky said the human being is the man who can grow used to anything or something like that. You know, like. So, yeah, I wonder, I guess we'll grow used to this as well, but I don't like getting used to it. Taking notes as I go, I always take notes. Yeah, I likewise. So what are your questions? What do you want to talk about? Yeah, absolutely. So. So, OK, let's see. How exactly did you get started? You're a minister, a pastor, and then like typically people will make at least from my experience, because I'm also a Christian and I read the types of things I read. They sometimes label me an anomaly. They don't they don't find me to be a Bible thumper. Do you find that like how did you get into what you're doing as a minister? And then like, do you do people sort of find you to be like an anomaly? Do people think what you do is weird? Basically, yes, yes. Well, I well, I've. I am who I am, just like Popeye, and I've always been interested in ideas and thought, I mean, all the way I'm in my mid fifties now, but all the way back to college years as a local pastor. Being a pastor is a very interesting profession because you can take it a lot of different directions and many pastors do. You get the opportunity to study a particular text each week, prepare lessons, you deal with people in their personal lives, so you get a very close observation of human nature. And you usually have a degree of freedom with respect to your time. There's there's an expectation that you'll be doing some study. So I. I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic after my seminary training. I was that for a number of years, and then I came to Sacramento, California to pastor this small church. And I've always been I've always enjoyed on dyslexic, which hasn't helped in reading necessarily when audio books came out. That was a huge thing. I've I've been a fan of podcasts and I've always been an auditory learner. Anything that a professor would say in class, I would remember if I had to get it only out of a book, I struggled. So. A number of years ago when I when I I started blogging because. In some ways, the same and experiencing the same thing that you did looking for. Other people who are interested in the kinds of things that I was and the Internet sort of lended itself to that. And so I also discovered that I did a lot of writing on listservs and on my blog just to sort of work out ideas. I continue to read books. I'm also as I was talking to Ryan Bennett earlier this week. I'm a digger. When I hear an idea, I want to know where the idea comes from and what makes the person with that idea tick. So. And it's always it's always wrapped up in my own personal life, too. I mean, all of our lives are so in the in the mid in the mid aughts, I was I really dug deep into Tim Keller. I found, you know, I needed some I was kind of I got kind of to a dry burned out place, but I didn't have the kind of five kids. So I didn't have the five kind of family situation where I could just say to my family, I'm burned out right now. I'm going to stop doing this job. And so I had to in a sense, I had to dig for water. And so I did a lot of digging into Tim Keller to try and figure out what was going on in New York City after 9-11 with the explosion of Redeemer Presbyterian. Why was Tim Keller getting the kind of responses he was getting? And I was on that for a number of years and then sort of lost interest and became a general forager again. I'd started reading the blog of Rod Dreher because I was kind of curious about what was happening in that culture space. And Jordan Peterson came up on the radar screen there. And I thought, why would a professor of psychology at the University of Toronto be kvetching about non-binary pronouns at that point? My kids were in high school and I was surrounded by lots of kids with non-binary pronouns changing their names all the time. And, you know, these were my kids friends and they were in my home all the time and they slept on my couch. And, you know, I loved these kids. They were, you know, their kids. But nobody when I went to high school changed their pronoun or changed their name. And that's like, well, what's going on with that? And so then Jordan Peterson is digging in about this. And I thought, well, that's interesting. And I start and I think, well, maybe he's some evangelical who somehow, you know, was able to keep tenure in a university. And then I noticed he was doing a biblical series. I thought, well, maybe he really is a Christian who is just a conservative Christian and misplaced in a in a blue state place, even though Canada is a blue state. And then I listened to his biblical lectures and thought, no, this is a totally different animal. And some of the stuff he said about the Bible, I thought the doesn't have any he doesn't have any formal education in the Bible. That much is fairly true. I mean, he's using Blue Bible and Bible Hub to get his information and commentaries in public domain. But at the same time, a lot of his other ideas were fresh and interesting and stimulating. And I found this very much stimulating me. And then I was reading Reddit or comment section or something. And someone was saying, yeah, I used to be into Tim Keller and now I'm totally into Jordan Peterson. And I thought, well, that's interesting because Jordan Peterson and Tim Keller are in very different spaces. But in a sense, what they have in common is that they're deep into thinking about things and thinking about things creatively and presenting it in new fresh ways. And I began to notice all of this other stuff going on around Jordan Peterson. And I was using my normal channels to try and drum up conversation partners and being a little bit frustrated. And so and I was also rereading Neil Postman's Amusing Ourselves to Death at the Time, thinking about media. And I was for a long time and thought about doing more writing, but had never really been able to get into a disciplined groove of doing longer works. And I looked around my congregation. I thought, if I wrote a book, no one here would read it. They don't read books, at least the kind of books that I would want to write. And a lot of the books that people in church are reading, I don't like to read. And so I wouldn't like to write it. I would hate myself writing it. So and then I thought, well, what about video? So I started playing around with video and then a member of my church who's on disability for mental illness says, you know, Pastor Paul, why don't you and me do a TV show? It's like, how's that going to work? He had been down to public access and I thought I'm not going to traipse down to public access at some weird time in my calendar. So I said, Freddie, I'll tell you what, I'll use my smartphone and we'll make little five minute shows and I'll post them on YouTube because I used YouTube to post sermons and just play around with it. I thought I'll post it there and I'll post it to Facebook and 10 or 15 people from the church who know us both will watch it sometime. And so that's how the Freddie and Paul show started. And then Jordan Peterson came up and I was watching this and I thought there's something about this with YouTube. YouTube is an important thing and an important change in our capacity to find each other and talk. And I've got some thoughts about Jordan Peterson's biblical series. So I think Jordan Peterson's important. I think Jordan Peterson's important missiologically and culturally. And I want to talk about Jordan Peterson. And so I'll make a video. Why not? And so I'd been playing around with different things. And so I made a video. And, you know, like two days later, I had 300 YouTube subscribers. I thought, I didn't expect that. Well, they'll stop. And then I had 500 and thought, this is a little troubling. It's exciting, but troubling. And then I had a thousand and then I had 2000 and you can even find the video where I say, okay, that's enough. I don't want any more than 2000 because I don't want this messing up my life. But then, you know, I wanted to talk to people and then I found that people wanted to talk to me like we're doing now. And so I start talking to people on Zoom and on Skype. And I'm thinking, boy, this person should talk to this person. And so I started asking people, can I record this? Can I share this? And people like, well, okay. And sometimes it was appropriate and sometimes it wasn't. So then I start not, and I kept making YouTube videos because I was getting what I wanted in terms of conversation partners more than I expect them. And I start getting this flood of emails and I'm like, this wasn't what I expected, but I can't turn these people away. That's, I'm a pastor. I don't turn people away. I talk to homeless people and whoever comes around, but there's just lots of them. So I have to figure out how to handle this. So one thing led to another. And I start posting conversations and then people are watching the conversations. Then people are wanting to get on the channel for a conversation. And then we start a local meetup of people in Sacramento who wanted to talk about Jordan Peterson. And people keep coming to that and new people keep coming to that. And just on and on and on and on and on. And I'm still, if Jordan Peterson had a big wave that crested and fell, obviously, because of his wife's illness and his illness, my wave has just sort of been slow. There was kind of an initial wave when Jordan was scored. I was kind of in his draft. I was sort of, I was awake behind his wave. But it's continuing to go on. And for me, I mean, my monologue videos, as I call them, they're just thinking out loud because I get stimulated by the comment sections. We started a Discord server. I get stimulated by that and by the community and by conversations like this. And so I just keep going. And it's fun. And it's stimulating for my ministry. And I want to, you know, I both want to figure out how this medium can be useful for local ministry and for ministry in general, but also this other estuary project that I'm interested in, the concept of we need to have, like earlier this week, I had a terrific conversation with Ryan Bennett. And, you know, he's a was kind of a Sam Harris atheist. And now he's not so much, but he's still an atheist. And we had a terrific conversation because I want to know how they think. I want to know what they think. So that's that's my story. That's how I got here. Oh, that's. Yeah. So it's kind of was there any were you were you all interested in these types of things like before the sort of Jordan Pearson phenomena? Like as a kid, were you always like kind of like, like when I was a kid, I was labeled the nerd, basically, you know, like everyone was like, they once tried to give me the nickname Webster because I like to just read dictionary and get big words. And like my dad would use big words and like, would use sometimes it's use French and German and things like that occasionally. And like I saw I kind of like started using these big words. And so were you ever like that as a as a kid? Did you ever? A little bit. I was dyslexic. So reading was onerous for me. But I liked ideas and I was a nerd. So, you know, I didn't date girls in high school and I played Dungeons and Dragons with my friends. And I liked Tolkien and I liked Dune. And, you know, so I was that kind of nerd. But, you know, I wasn't particularly good at sports. So, yeah, I was a nerd, but I was I didn't I wasn't I wasn't I wasn't a bookworm. Yeah, to be fair, I never read a book. Well, let's see. I read maybe one book a year for like school or something like that. And but I was I was more I did play a lot of video games and like things like that. Like I think by the time I was 19, I had four years of time logged in video games. So I spent four full years of my life just burnt World Warcraft, League of Legends, those computer games like like because the time is logged there. So I could literally see there goes that was four years of my life. And now when I think back on that, I'm like, oh, my God, four years, four full years. Like that, like, like just sitting here for four years and just staring at this for four years. Yeah, it's like that's so upsetting to me because like you can do so much with four full years of time. It's like 40,000 hours or something like it's a lot of time, you know, like it's. Yeah, man, but. They didn't have those when I was young. We had Pong. You couldn't you couldn't spend four years with Pong. No, that is where I started. I did start. I was four years old and I started with Atari 2600 with the knobs, you know, me and my sister would play Pong. And then it just when I was six, I started using computer and then. From there is history, but it was kind of beneficial in some sense that did help me. Like most of my skills are self taught and I was able to work at an engineering place, engineering firm for like four years testing software, which was really great. Gave me like a lot of experience, but like all my skills were just developed because I basically like as a kid, like I couldn't we didn't have like a nice computer. I mean, it was I was born in 95 and so 2000 like the computers, I think my first computer or the first computer I had access to had. 200 megabytes of 256 megabytes of RAM, which was probably for that time pretty fast. But but just like troubleshooting the computer so I could play more video games basically, you know. But you kind of mentioned like your your desire for these conversations and your interest in Jordan Peterson. Do you think that like and so you're kind of like, I don't know if you'd if you'd say this by yourself, but maybe you're more you're kind of in touch with like the prevailing opinion, maybe like the zeitgeist is that that's the right term to use. When it when it comes to sort of this like idea that I kind of maybe mentioned earlier of. The lack of meaning in people's lives individually do you have you has that. How recent do you think the trend is, I guess, because for my whole life, as far as I can remember, I have seen it or at least the people that have been around me have experienced it. And I myself have experienced it. How like I guess if there was a date or an event that you could attribute to that sort of spread, what where do you think it took started or where do you think that kind of began? I think it's been in the culture for a while. I personally never experienced it, partly because. As a Christian. And as a as a committed Christian from a deeply Christian family. We always had a mission. We always had meaning. And so in many ways that kind of Christian is always trying to is always looking for people lacking meaning, saying, hey, here's a meaning. Go run with this. You can you can, you know, you can run with this your whole life long and it'll be less of a waste than World of Warcraft. So and somebody mentioned to me recently said, you know, I don't think a lot of Christians have meaning crises, and I think that's true because religion, at least if you're. If you're fully embedded in a religion that isn't too contaminated or cross pressured with secularization. It's a it's a deeply meaningful thing now. This this materialist nihilism. You know, when I listen to let's say Sam Harris is conversation with Brett Weinstein. You know, Sam, Sam, I get the sense Sam is on a mission. But when I think about the the philosophical underpinnings of his mission, I can see why most people aren't. Because this this kind of weird duality between a strange determinism and then You know, living in the manifest image of, well, we've got to our mission is to get people off of the the stupid drug of religion. Well, there's there he's getting his meaning, but he doesn't have a philosophical system that really affords it and so I would really became quite So as a as a as a Christian as a as a dramatically unsuccessful Christian minister, I was mostly surrounded by Christian people who weren't having a meaning crisis. But when I Began, you know, as I began getting into the people that were attracted to Jordan Peterson. You know, it was about a year into it. I began to notice that a lot of the people coming to me have had histories of depression. Some suicidal ideation and And and watching Jordan Peterson is making them better. And it's like Well, that's interesting. Why would watching videos of this rambly Canadian psychologist relief people of depression and then you begin to recognize. Well, what's causing this depression. We've so we so medicalized depression that You know, it's, it's just silly. And and even though there's very much a medical aspect to it, but why would watching Jordan Peterson relieve depression. Well, then, then I watched for vacancy and he's much more in terms of this meaning crisis and he and Christopher Mastropietro's You know symptom ology of the meaning crisis. That's like, oh, I see. And I've had I had tastes of that myself. I had I had tastes of that myself. I had I had read CS Lewis's book miracles about once or twice a year if if I felt sort of the the siren song of of naturalists of naturalism or materialism kind of Tweaking up the doubt quotient in my own mind. And after seeing Jordan Peterson and understanding what john vervecki was doing. I could see it much more clearly. I was sort of divorced from it though because I was deeply embedded in the church and the Christian community. Yeah, I think because I became a Christian later. Well, in my 20 when I turned 20 actually well just before my 21st birthday. And so like before that I was more on the edge of like Here's a statement, I would say back then I like Jesus. He's fine, but I can't get on board with the teachings of I can't get on board with The Old Testament or even some of the New Testament bits and and so on that since I regard him as like a wise teacher like maybe the Buddha or, you know, one of the those the Whatever, you know the James whatever like those I was more in that sense like a new age like I never once thought like I wasn't a One I never read a philosophy book in my life at that time. So I wasn't an intellectual conviction that I had that and nor nor had I even read through the Bible at that point like I didn't have an intellectual Conviction in either direction. I wasn't like, I read this and this is garbage or I read these books by David Hume and Sam Harris and whatever and like I don't I agree with him and like they totally dispelled my Christianity for me. Instead, I had some sort of like CS Lewis might call it like Christianity in water, you know, so I had like a little bit of a Life force philosophy. I had this this nebulous idea of the universe that could in some way intervene in my life or had been intervening in my life. And there was some notion of faith or destiny and and and so so so like I think that I don't like and I think Jordan Jordan Peterson gets in trouble for saying something like this or has and a lot of people got upset with him, but he's like, oh, I don't know. I don't know. Atheists atheists because they don't act out that belief of atheism. They don't act like for school in the coven crime and punishment essentially you know and and Or they don't. They're not, you know, they still hold on to these sort of like Under these these diluted Christian beliefs, at least, you know, you could say like and I think more and more people are noticing that like with the advent of like people, you know, like the Calling themselves Christian atheists now or whatever, you know, like it's kind of It was almost is almost I imagine like when CS Lewis talked about being the unwilling convert coming kicking and screaming into the kingdom of God. I imagine in some sense like A lot. A lot of atheists are being are coming kicking and screaming into like Christian culture essentially like they are waking up and realizing like This is like in Tom Holland's book dominion. This is sort of the fish bowl or this is the water in the fish bowl rather you know like it's sort of Inevitable, at least in the West, because it's so saturated with Christian ideals. You just, that's what you get. And so I think maybe like I think for a while like Christianity and water worked for a lot of people like they didn't there wasn't like I think for a while like Christianity and water worked for a lot of people like they didn't there wasn't like They could kind of get on on this sort of slurry of like a few bits of virtue and like do good things. And then also like There's this you have some destiny or there's some fate something out there that could do something for you. Or does things for you whenever good things happen. But when bad things happen. We don't know we don't that's we don't talk about that, like maybe the universe is angry at you. And I think maybe that worked for a while, but I think like it was an unsustainable like You know, I think it just got too diluted basically or something, you know, and so then they were just left with water and then they had, you know, I think in some sense like well now depression, anxiety, suicide. Those are on the rise and like especially in young people, you know, And like when you had said like we talked about Making depression more of a physical thing more of like a chemical imbalance or you know you have to go and get these drugs administered to you like that's That is a problem, especially when like I'm in a clinical psych class right now and they say, you know, exercise is the best medication or just like And now the big thing is cognitive behavioral therapy and all of a sudden they found that it has virtually the same success rate as Prescription medication, you know, and so if you exercise and do CBT and CBT is basically in some sense in some sense. Parts of the Christian mission in some sense, you know, like I think I think that there's strong ties to CBT and like the imitation of Christ or something like that, you know, where it's like You have to examine yourself your thoughts and then your behaviors, you know, so it's like I think in some sense it's GK Chastain and we call it the long way home, basically, you know, like, I don't know if you ever read his book, Man Alive, but Man Alive is my favorite book. I read it and then I immediately read it again because it's so amazing. It's about a guy named Innocent Smith and he goes into his house like for instance he's there's it's a lot of different stories. But one of the stories is he's trying to get into his house. And but to keep his perspective fresh, he goes in a different way every time. So he may break into the window or the chimney and And and so and his wife just kind of puts up with it. He's like, oh, that's just Innocent Smith like Like and he's taking someone with them and he's like breaking in through the window and like you have to walk very quiet and like The guy's with them is like, are we breaking this guy's house, you know, and then he finds out that it's a house, you know, and then there's and then part of that story is He wants to go he wants to go into the back door. So he goes around the world to go through the back door. And all the while there's poems along the way he goes to like China and meets a guy fishing and you know there's He tells poems to each person, you know, I'm looking for the immutable house, the house of red on the hill that That shines in the light and provides hope and comfort to all men who seek it and like things like that, you know, like people like what this guy's crazy. And it turns out he's just going through his back door, you know, but I think that's in some sense what's what's may inevitably happen, you know, Like we'll we've gone through this phase of Christianity and water, it has to in some sense I don't want to say die. I don't know that it could ever really die because there are some people living in the body that truly Exonere exemplify Christian virtue Christian values, you know, the pursuit of Christ. And things like that. But then there's like I think in some sense like the sun has to set and then I don't know what will happen at that point. But I would think that if history is going to continue and something else doesn't happen or another, you know, some other unforeseen event, then we'll eventually find a way home in that sense, maybe. I think in some Jordan Pearson has played a big part in that revelation maybe Well, I think it's I think it's very true that It's interesting to me that psychology is an area where this is where this is coming up in I There are there have always been bigger questions around psychology, but it has always been a question of Of sort of Making people in some ways, making people compliant and docile because that's sort of what we want. So one of the things that that I came into well so my father was a pastor in In a poor community in Patterson, New Jersey, and they're one of the things that you get in the United States and in poor communities as you do it's Americans America stratifies stratified And if you're struggling with mental illness, if there's racial issues, you know, you'll, you'll tend to get into into the poor communities, people will settle. And so I grew up with a lot of people who were in poverty. And then when I came to this church when I came to this church, I found it as well as a I didn't know you'll tend to get into the poor communities, people will settle. And so I grew up with a lot of individuals in my father's church who were dealing with serious mental illness. And then when I came to this church, when I came to this church, I found it as well. And so I began, not only had I had a history of dealing with people who were struggling with mental illness, and sometimes, sometimes hilariously so, and often tragically so, and then then here in this church as well. And what I began to discover is that they were embedded in a medical establishment that, okay, so the medical establishment was terrifically well-meaning. But at some point, you have to ask the question, what is the straight stick? What is the life that, what does this, what is the agenda of this medical establishment for these people? And in many ways, the agenda is have them not cause trouble. And, you know, then I see it in schools, and I begin to realize, well, that's sort of the program in schools too. We like children who are compliant and who say yes, and who go along with whatever program. I mean, my wife's a school teacher, but school teachers are often little tyrants. I mean, their classes are little tyrannies. And so if the country could get away with it, you know, I would get the sense that part of what many would like to do is just simply emasculate people on, first it was television, and now it's the internet and video games. And just, we have too many people with too many ideas, and they cause too much trouble. So if they can't be productive in terms of making us all more wealthy, at least keep them quiet. And I see that all the time, and it's like, is that what a human being is for? And churches are in some ways the same way. What do churches want? Churches want docile, compliant, yes people, and people who, pastors want, you know, crowds of people who applaud the pastor. And that can't be right. Yeah, I totally agree with you. It's like, there are a lot of like parallels I can see in my mind in some sense. It's like we were like trying to lop off the margins for some reason, because those outliers make us uncomfortable. Yeah. I think someone said something like, if there was a Socrates alive today, we would have him reeducated in an instant. You know, like we would cure him of his genius basically. You know, and like it also kind of in some sense reminds me of like the Grand Inquisitor and Dostoevsky's, you know, where like, they're like, Jesus, you can't come back now. Like we have this great system going, like you're just going to ruin it. Like we have to, I'm sorry, but you all understand, like we need this. Like we've got a system, sorry. Like, you know, and I agree, like we've been anesthetized or immunized from brilliance, from original thought, creativity, activity in some senses, like, but with the rising rates of like obesity and weight-related illnesses, you know, like things like that, like we're basically just going to, we're literally going to just become like very, I don't know what a good parallel is, but just very, like, just like you're saying, very compliant, very like, yes, yes, yes, like doing exactly what we're told to do, doing exactly, you know, like there'll be no radicals, or maybe there will be radicals still, but there'll certainly be fewer of them, you know. Well, even the radicalism is domesticated, you know. True, true. You watch Steve Jobs, I mean, one of the most popular commencement addresses, Steve Jobs at Stanford saying, you know, buck dogma, and everyone's like, yeah, buck dogma. It's like, doesn't that become the dogma? Yeah. I mean, seriously. Nobody, is nobody paying attention? I listened to that. I, so again, I grew up in a Christian community, and the commencement addresses in Christian schools, they had their own liturgies, and their own repetitions, and their own compliances, and their own boring qualities too. It was all just usually the Christian chatter. And then, you know, here in California, my kids went to public school, and I'm going to these commencement addresses, and like, well, this is, I, you know, they're not that different from the Christian. They say very different things, but they're all saying it. It's like, I don't believe in dogma. Oh, yeah, and that's your dogma. And, you know, and so then suddenly you're in the strange position of saying, well, what actually would be fresh? And is it just simply a, is it just fresh for me? Or, how do we, why is it that we recognize genius or something worthwhile listening to? And, you know, it's deeply mysterious, but somehow we know we can't live without it. And somehow when we recognize that we've just spent, you know, four years of our life playing a video game, we begin to say, well, maybe I wouldn't have done that again. Yeah, absolutely. Like, there's no way that, like, now I would ever do that, like what I did again, you know, like, because there's, that time I couldn't possibly, I was so dim. Like, when I think back to the time, I feel physically dim. I, because all, you know, I can't, like, I think about the thoughts that I had at that time in my life, and it's like, there were so rudimentary, like how do I get this item in this game? How do I, you know, am I going to have time, like, after school? Like, what am I going to do? Like, that kind of thing, you know? And like, now, like, now they're so, my thoughts are so different, like, the thoughts that I have just on a daily basis, you know, like, now I'm not saying that they're enlightened thoughts or that I feel in some way more enlightened. I am maybe to my former self, of course, but like, as far as like the standard of the world, maybe like, you know, if you had a measuring stick and we were comparing everybody, I'm not, I don't rank on there, but at least, at least I can tell, you know, that dimness. And I think in some sense, like my, because I went to public school too, and just the curriculum in public school, at least where I'm from, in Missouri, St. Louis, it's so, and I think this maybe is a more general thing in America, but like the idea is heavy stim, stim, stim, stim, stim, stim, you know, science, technology, you know, that type of thing. Like, it's, that's the big thing is like, there's a big engineering school in Missouri, RALA, or Missouri S&T, and like everyone's like, engineer, engineer, technology, like that kind of thing. And like, it's almost like in the pursuit of science and technology, we forgot, we forgot all the humanities, basically, we left them lying on the nursery floor, you know, with like fairy tales and stuff like that. And so like now people only value if you can produce an electric car or a new cell phone, or, you know, a faster processor, or, you know, whatever, like, but less and less, I think we're valuing, and I think in large part to our education system. And I think in some sense, like people who aren't taught about, I don't know, like people aren't taught poetry, literature, philosophy, religion, are certainly more, what'd you say, like, anesthetized, they're just more, less likely to have these, you know, less likely to find themselves in the margin, basically, you know, like, because like all the great people that I've ever read, I recently read a book by Richard Feynman. And he granted he hated, like the humanities, the soft sciences, he did not like them at all, you know, he's a theoretical physicist, he's like, he like, he talks about, he talked about in this book, how he basically like, he had to write a theme on Faust, but he just made a mockery of it, but it still got high marks because he's a genius, you know, but, but, you know, but he was still exposed to Faust. I don't know if I said Faust to anybody that anyone would know. Certainly no one I went to school with. I would bet there's one guy I know who would know what Gertrude Faust was, but I don't know that anyone else would. And not saying that that's like the benchmark, but like, maybe if someone knew who Wordsworth or Milton or Keats or anybody, any poet, any philosopher, any novelist, any writer, like, I don't, I think that our education in large part has been used, like you've been saying, to make us, I don't know if you'd say, well, weak, I guess. I don't know if you've ever watched Solzhenitsyn's addressment commencement speech to Harvard, but he literally just gets up there and says, the West is weak and will not oppose anybody. Like you've grown, grown fat and lazy basically, you know, it's like, and in some sense, like, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, there's a lot of truth to that. And you can, you can spot it. I remember in one of my, so again, I was dyslexic, so I tended to watch a lot of PBS stuff, documentaries, interested in ideas. And I remember when Ken Burns, when Ken Burns' Civil War documentary came out, listening to the kinds of letters that 19th century people would write. I remember as a kid, my father would, so my father, my father's, my grandfather was a minister and tended to have churches that were in the rural Midwest. I mean, really tiny out of the way places. And so my father would go to these one room or nearly one room school houses. And this is, you know, in the, in the middle part of the 20th century. I mean, there's still places that are that rural and that out of the way, but in some ways he would get a better education because, you know, well, the teacher's teaching to all of these kids. And so it's a little young, smart boy. He's listening to the upper level stuff going on. And then when my wife and I homeschooled our kids and I began to notice that at first, you know, it was my wife's idea. I had always grown up in Christian school, but the Christian schools here weren't quite what they were. We didn't, we didn't grow up in our, our Christian reform community here. And so my wife's like, well, I'd like to homeschool. And it's like, oh, okay. And so she's homeschooling the kids. And so she's homeschooling the kids. And I eventually had, you know, my time doing homeschooling with the kids too. But I began to notice that, you know, these kids in an hour or two would get pretty much get through all of kind of the basic, the math and the grammar and all that stuff. They could get through that stuff pretty quickly in terms of their education stuff. And I was worried, oh, they're going to be behind. And then I learned, no, they're not behind at all. And I realized that a lot of what's happening in schools is just a waste of time. And so basically, you know, and with an hour or two, my kids, if they were diligent at all, which they weren't always, could get their work done. And then it's like, you know, here, you can have an hour of computer time where you can play a little computer game or something. We'll have a little bit of educational TV time where we'll watch some science or some history thing and then read a book. And my kids read books. And some of my kids read lots of books. And it's like, you know, eventually they went into the public school system. And I think in many ways, the public school system wasn't helpful. And even and then I watched, you know, not all of my kids listened to me in terms of what I what college I told them they should have gone to. Some some did, some didn't. But then I look at what's happening in the universities and suddenly I could understand what Jordan Peterson was so upset about. I think his third video that I watched was a conversation he had had at Harvard, which was basically saying, you know, let these people read books, let them read the classics, let them as I see people leaving with university degrees. And I think they haven't read anything. They don't they don't know anything. They haven't. You know, even if you're going to have them do all these studies, things at least have them have at least a track where they're reading some of the classics that are out there. But they don't know Plato or Aristotle or or they they they don't know any history. They know nothing because this is sort of where this whole social justice thing has really gone to seed because what they basically have is something analogous to the worst elements of my Christian school education, which, you know, we were kind of fed a line about Roman Catholics and kind of fed a line about non-Christians. And, you know, and if you're paying attention, you get outside, you begin to realize part of my Christian education has been propagandized. But at least with a Christian education, there's enough that so many of the of the important Christian figures throughout history were classicists. And so you'll bump into, you know, maybe Luther didn't like Aquinas, but you'll have to figure out what he was so upset about. And and why is Aristotle a problem? And, you know, why is Plato the good guy? And who is Augustine? And, you know, as Lewis said, you know, you're going to you're going to you're going to wind up bumping into people who are substantive and have made serious contributions and are dangerous, whether you've got a a secular humanist propaganda or a Christian propaganda or now a new woke propaganda. You dig enough and you're you're going to wind up talking to a real philosopher. And even if he's one of the black hats, depending on where you're sitting, you're going to bump into he's pushing against someone who's of substance. And there you know it. Now you're into the vein. Now you're into however we describe it. Now you're into the thing. Now you're into as Steve Martin and Leap of Faith called. Now you're into the genuine article. And as Lewis, once you get into that and once you get a taste for it, well, the propaganda is going to suffer if you have, you know, if you have any awareness or integrity or, you know, any any blessing from God. So. Yeah, no, I totally agree with you. That that quote has always stuck with me. You know, he says a young man cannot remain a sound atheist and well read or something. Or one must be careful of what he reads if he wishes to remain a sound atheist. That's right. And it's that I've I've found that to be the case as well, because like the more that I personally read and like I would have killed for now, I would have loved to have had like the education that Lewis had, like going and sitting with like the great Nock Kirkpatrick, like having this tutor with you, like to have a tutor that was a genius basically, and to be able to like learn from them in like a one or two student environment. Like, man, like I wish I had that, you know, like I wish I could do that. And so like now I do a lot like I do it all my own basically, you know, like I read the books and things like that and buy like, I use the great courses a lot. I don't know if you ever heard of that. Yeah. Oh, yeah, I use them a lot, too. I love them. Yeah, they're so good. And so I get a bunch of them. There are some there's a sale on some right now. But Oh, really? Oh, no, no audible. I think. Yeah. They're like somewhere for $5. I think. But yeah, so I got I got a few I got a few of them. I can't remember them off the top of my head. But there's one on classics that I got. And then they have one about the problem of evil and suffering, which is interesting. But like, but most people and more and more, I think, are going to be going to like like they'll be so far removed from the idea of education being something other than them being taught their sums, their maybe sometimes syntax. I wasn't even taught grammar in my public schooling, you know, and so it's like, which is a real, real, real pain for me right now. But but just like getting into it and like, also not not having to worry about being the best, because like another thing with like the education system now, it's like there's so much of this comparison, like where are you as far as you know, the national average or the state scores or you know, they have map testing, standardized testing, all these different types of tests that they administer to make sure that you're in line with all the other people of your age group. But it's like, you know, I don't I don't always know how useful that is, especially like if you were to like, how do you quantify, like, okay, you could say, does he know the themes of the Brothers Karamazov? It's like, but to reduce the Brothers Karamazov to that would be ridiculous. Like it would be stupid, it would just be stupid, plain stupid, because the Brothers Karamazov speaks on more than like, whether you know the themes or not, like the Brothers Karamazov, like, you know, the themes are not like the Brothers Karamazov is like influenced, you know, millions of people to do, you know, to change their views to become different, aspire to different things. It's like, it's one of the most enlightening books that you can read and like to be like to like you took a class on Dostoevsky, you might that may be all you get. And like, I was I've been listening, I guess Dostoevsky is top of mind, because I listened like six lectures about him over the past couple days. And the and the guy's lecturing is very passionate about it, you know, like, that's that's one of the great courses. No, that one wasn't. I've been looking for one for that. This was on YouTube. This is on YouTube. Yeah, I can find the links and Yeah, send me the link. Yeah, because I saved them. But he's studied Dostoevsky for like 50 years or something, you know, and like, he, you know, he talks about he's talking about the Brothers Karamazov being like one of the single greatest books in history, at least in the past 200 years, you know, and and but he talks about it like in a way that you would talk about someone that you love, you know, and I don't think anyone will get that type of passion for something out of like their general curriculum or the required courses for the standard degrees unless you're going into classics. I think it's unlikely that you'll develop the same level passion that that guy was able to develop, or even like any other person who might read it for fun would develop, you know. And so it's like, I definitely like the the way we're educated and the emphasis on the types of things we're educated and then like the standardizing of our education, like, are all serving to like, I can't help but think about, I typically refer to C.S. Lewis's Space Trilogy, but a lot of people, the classical parallel is 1984 by George Orwell, but I think that, I think that that hideous strength is like the Christian parallel to that book. I don't know if you ever read that hideous strength. I read it too many years ago and you haven't been on the, you haven't been on the bridges of meaning discord server yet, have you? I have not. You haven't met the randos united channel yet, have you? No. You are, you, you, see here's the problem. You have now by talking to me, come onto the radar screen of a community of people who are going to find you and want to talk to you and this is how it begins. You just mentioned Lewis's Space Trilogy and yeah, they'll, they'll come after you. You'll see. In a bad way or a good way? In a good way, in a good way. No, the, so part of what, so we started a local meetup and the people here enjoyed it so much and of course I talked about it on my channel and of course people are spread out and they can't have a meetup to talk about these things and so they, some of the people, some of the guys in our local meetup started the bridges of meaning discord server and that has, that has gone really well and a nice community has formed and you'll, like they'll, they'll be in the comment section, read the comment section. There's a link to that, an invite to the discord server, go to the discord server, mention the Space Trilogy and it will begin. Awesome, that's good because that's another thing. No, when I say Space Trilogy they're like what? I didn't even know he wrote a Space Trilogy and like, but that, I read those books, I read, I read them all like, I don't know, five or six times and like it's, it was such an impact, like I, you know, it's such a good series, like such a relevant series too, you know, like and a chilling series. Actually, like it was very hard for me to finish that Hedius Strength first time through because it was like, I was literally becoming, I was, I was getting scared reading it basically, like, but eventually powered through, especially in like the objectivity room, you know, where he's, he has to step on the figure of Christ, you know, to, to desensitize himself, to, you know, anything transcendent basically, but yeah, so that's interesting. I'll be, I'll be looking forward to these. They, they are coming, they are coming. I'm warning you. Excellent. They're very nice and they're, well, and, and again, I mean, this, this whole, you know, finding and I, the, the, both the privilege and the liability of my position in this is that I've sort of been the gatherer, so I help people find each other, but I don't get to be in the room as much because I'm always helping people find each other. I'm doing my own things, but no, the Bridges of Meeting Discord server is a, people spend a lot of time on that too, but it's, it's, it's talking about, it's very clearly talking about the kinds of things that you're interested in. And so what has happened with you with respect to, so you mentioned you became a Christian. What has happened to you with respect to church? How has that gone for you? Yeah. I mean, I, so I found a church early on. It's like a non-denominational church. It was the church that was like at the beginning of my conversion and I stayed there for a while. And then like, there are like a, kind of like a multiplicity of reasons why I ended up leaving that church. But a large part of it was like, I had to start taking care of my dad a lot, basically. And so it was just like, takes up a lot of time pretty much. He has had a TBI, a traumatic brain injury. And so I had to, at the beginning I had to spend weeks basically with him. And it was just, it took a lot of my time, weekends, nights and things like that. And so I just kind of grew away from it in that sense. And then also my wife worked Sundays a lot too. And so it was very difficult to kind of get, to be as connected as I was originally, just with those pressures. And then by the time everything kind of really settled down, we, the COVID happened basically. And so then everything was online. It's like kind of hard to get involved in the church at that time. So like we have a, we've sort of, we've scouted a church. Like we see one that we want to go to. It's actually reformed church, but I can't remember what the exact name of it is at the top, the top of my head right now. But like, I don't have a lot of, I guess I don't, I don't know that I have a lot of like reformed tendencies because I've also been to, like I've been to a lot, like we went to a lot of churches early on to kind of see what's what. And I can't stand like mega church environment or like, I can't, there are a lot of churches that I just go to and I feel like I'm listening to some motivational Tony Robbins or Mel Brooks. I just feel like I'm listening to a motivational speaker basically, and I just can't stand it, you know? And so then I was like contemplating like, like, you know, there are a lot of other like more like liturgy focused places and I'm like, oh, okay, well that would be the absence of all those things that I hate. But like also I'm not too keen on some of those doctrinal teachings. And so then it's kind of like just very, it's very difficult to find a good fit. But I think from what I've read about this church, I think it will be a good church once we're able to go to it. But so like it was, and then also like just being in any in-church environment, like I've just always been an anomaly, you know, so like sometimes I feel weird being in some environments and like some people think I'm heretical of that. Some people think I'm not a Christian because I talk about, because I ask, you know, very difficult questions like things that would make me doubt, you know, like Dostoevsky's Brothers Karamazov raises questions, questions that raise doubts, you know, like you can't listen to that dialogue between Alyosha and Ivan whenever he brings up all his horrible, horrible stories about the little girl in the outhouse. Yeah, yeah. I mean, I cried for hours after that. Like you can't, you know, those are tough, those you have to address those questions, you know, like, yeah. And so, but like some people think it's almost heretical to say stuff like that, you know, it's like, and so that kind of puts a strain on that, those types of relationships, but for the most part, I've been able to find some people that I've been able to really connect with and that aren't estranged by the types of things that I'm interested in talking about, you know, but then they inevitably move away. It's like a friend of mine I was good friends with, we meet up every Friday and talk about, we were reading through Calvin's Institutes of the Christian Religion, and every Friday morning we meet up and talk about it, but then he moved away to Pennsylvania to go to seminary. Another friend of mine that I would meet up and talk with every like Thursday moved to Denver, and then like, you know, just like, yeah, people just people that I would talk with that were interested in these types of things eventually go off to do, you know, things, you know. Yeah. So right now we're, we believe we've found a church, but we just have to have to. And it's got to work for you and your wife, so. Yeah, yeah, that's another thing is like finding something that we both like, that resonates with both of us, you know, that we both find to be true. Yeah. That's the first thing that I go in, I'm like, are they saying anything that I find blatantly false, you know? Is there anything that I'm like, ah, this is rubbing me the wrong way, you know, I don't like what he said there, I don't like, you know, that kind of stuff. No, it's tough, and people are, I mean, we started out the conversation talking about the fact that you have a hard time finding people who are like you, and so you're obviously not going to find a church of everyone like you, and so there's going to be compromises involved, but that's not a bad thing, because you grow in those areas, because, you know, it's one thing to have this theory about loving people in, loving people in general, I mean, of course, Dostoevsky talks about that quite a bit, you know, it's people are love, people are easy to love in theory, meet a real human being and love that one, that's a whole different kettle of fish. They're inconvenient, they're obnoxious, they're brilliant, they're frustrating, they're, you know, and of course, that's why, you know, think what you want about the institution of marriage, but actually work a marriage is a whole different thing. Oh, yeah, absolutely. It reminds me of, and you may be able actually, okay, so I've told this story several times, but it was originally told to me by my logic professor, and I have not been able to find the source of this, and I fear that I might have remembered the name wrong, but you may be aware of where this comes from, but also, let me take a note, because I want to circle back to something you said there. So the story is essentially, from what I remember, it was from St. Augustine, and it was something about the perfect life for the philosopher, and he says, perfect life for the philosopher would be something where he would live in a house and he'd have someone in the house with him and then talk to or someone who is in the same field as him, but just a little bit better than him in every way. And so whenever they have conversations or debates, he's always getting out it basically, he's always losing basically, just barely. So he always has to get higher and higher and higher and higher. They spar up into the clouds, but also what's important in this house, so that they don't lock themselves away in an ivory tower of intellect and conversation, is that this house would contain people from every other area of life. They would have a spouse, they'd have kids, they'd have the gardeners, the cooks, the butlers, they'd have all these people of varying skills and understandings and expertise, all these different people that have just different understandings. And so that's so that you can come back down basically, so that you have a stratification of your understanding basically. It's sort of like Richard Feynman's idea that you should be able to explain something at every level, and that would be an indication of true understanding. And so the philosopher gets all the benefit in the world from sparring with this really brilliant guy, but then he also has to go out and talk shop with the gardener or talk about everyday affairs with his wife or things like that. I don't know who said it, but I've never heard it before, but I like it. And it's true. And in a sense, the internet gives us some of that, because we're talking now, and you can talk to other people, and yet at the same time, you're not married to a philosopher, and you're taking care of your caregiver for your father. And even that is something to one who is paying attention, there's almost nothing you can't learn from. That's very true. Yeah, and that's what I was kind of thinking. I'd written down a note because you talked about loving in practice, and Dostoevsky's quote on that. I think the best thing someone can do is be in a non-reciprocal relationship, whether that's with a child or a dog or a disabled person or something like that. It reminds me of a practice the monks used to do where they would wear hair shirts under their clothes to remind them of the temperance of life so that they would never be comfortable in this world. Caring for someone who can literally do nothing for you, I think is one of the most, I don't know, what you call soul building things you can do. And I didn't have that until I started caring for my father, like someone who literally he can't do anything for me. It's all if you have a note that you take basically. And I think that's important. And a lot of people are, that's sort of another common thing that's floating around where people are like, you should cut off toxic relationships. But the definition of toxic relationship is like another thing that's been put into water and diluted. It's not a toxic relationship is not an abusive relationship or manipulative relationship. It's a relationship in which you get nothing from it. Or it's an inconvenient relationship, a relationship which challenges you in ways you don't want to be challenged. Right. No, you're exactly right. Or it's like a relationship between someone and their mentor. They would think that in some sense that might be toxic because they're always criticizing what you do and that kind of thing. But it's like that dissolution of true toxicity, it has robbed us from many edifying relationships we might otherwise have. Because people all the time, they're like, I got to go find myself, I got to go figure out who I am. And they leave their wife, their children, their house, their job. And it's like, I don't think that's how you become what you are. I think you become who you're meant to be under immense pressure. It's sort of like, what did I, I'm reading The Imitation of Christ by Thomas Kempis. And I read it before bed. And he talks about assuming as much pressure, as much burden, taking on as many things as you can take, basically, as much as you can take, basically up until the point of cracking. And it's like that pressure is what exposes you for what you are. He says, it's not that you, and C.S. Lewis calls them rats in the cellar. Imagine there's a cellar and you have a basement or whatever and you rush in quickly and you see all the rats scurrying about. The rushing in did not make the rats appear there. The rats were already there. The rats were there to begin with. And the rushing in just exposed them. You were able to see the rats. So like being hungry, tired, uncomfortable, those are the, that's the rushing in. That kind of thing. That's right. That's right. That's right. No, it's growing in wisdom. It's growing in wisdom. And unfortunately, we have developed a society and are increasingly streamlining it to, the irony with this whole privilege thing is that it is so often those, you know, blessed are the weak, blessed are the blessed are the poor because in a context of enormous affluence like we have today, the disabilities are opportunities to grow in wisdom and strength and power and beauty. And it's just the truth. It doesn't mean you will, but there are opportunities. And you find people who have taken advantage of the bad situation, of the growing up with lousy parents, of the bad neighborhood, the poor job and have, they're off and have, you know, triumphed over these things and taking, taken these troubles and spun them into gold. And it's still, it's still doable. Yeah, I'm right. I totally agree with you. And they've, you know, I'm taking this class on trauma as well. And previously I've read a couple books on this idea of post-traumatic growth. So traumatic events don't always, always earn a net negative, you know, like traumatic events often provide a, well, one, they give you a framework for understanding people, you know, like if you're abused as a child, you won't grow up thinking that everybody is an angel, basically. And so you know, that child who was abused may grow up to develop, you know, a better ability to read people, understand people, like better mechanisms of defending themselves in their family, that kind of things. But then there's also like, there are a lot of what are called like the intangible benefits of trauma, you know, like which they refer to as wisdom, understanding, understanding, understanding, mental fortitude and resistance, that types of things. So like you experience trauma and you're able to, one of the, one of the core factors of your ability to turn trauma into something good is your ability, your meaning, your ability to apply a framework of meaning to it. And so like if you have a way of, if you have a way of understanding trauma, you know, like, you know, you know, And so like if you have a way of, if you have a way of meaning making that can turn a traumatic event into something, well, you might say edifying, you know, like then you have a higher chance of benefiting from that trauma, you know, like, or if your framework already includes, like the Christian narrative is that people are inherently flawed in some way, you know, like to what degree people have speculated on forever, you know, whether it's completely or partially or, whatever. But the idea is that people are flawed in some way, all people, you know, like the billionaire, the healthiest man in the world, like they're all flawed in some way, you know, like, whereas like in modern modernity or the people in modern times, they think that if you give someone enough wealth, health and happiness, they'll be good, you'll be a good person, you know, like, but that and that's what and GK Chastain notes this too, is Christianity gives you the ability to criticize the aristocrat, you know, it gives you the ability to criticize the king, it gives you the ability to criticize the millionaire, billionaire, you know, because it states off at the beginning that all have fallen short, you know, but that meaning, that framework and as that and we've noted before, like the framework is dissolving for meaning, you know, to frame things in meaningful way. Yeah, yeah, which would speak to that coddling of the American mind that Jonathan Haidt talks about, you know, like, as the as our ability to place things in a framework of meaning dissolves, so will our ability to positively internalize traumatic events. Yeah. And so that means like, that means, well, that's how you get micro aggressions. And that's how you get trigger warnings. And that's how you get things, you know, that nature is because like, since our framework for meaning is dissolved so much, like, the bar for traumatic events just gets lowered and lowered and lowered, you know, like, whereas someone like Solzhenitsyn can literally write, bless you prison for being in my life, you taught me so much, like, there on your prison mat straw, I learned the secrets of the human soul. And it's like, stuff like that, you know, like, I don't like that, that's such, or Viktor Frankl's in his Man's Search for Meaning, you know, being confronted with naked bare existence or naked existence, you know, like, that is the highest, that's one of the highest traumatic events you can experience, you know, and he was able to internalize it and then found the School of Logo Therapy. Yeah. And, you know, and make meaning and place it in a framework of meaning, rather. And, but that skill is being lost for a lot of the things that we've talked about here, education, upbringing, like the value system of modern times, the secularization of modern times, all sorts of, you know, that kind of stuff. Very true. Very true. Well, we've been talking for about an hour and a half now. I told you I go long. Yeah. I could still, I could go much, much longer, I'm sure. I've had a crushing headache for about 45 minutes. Oh, no. That's why I keep pressing on my forehead because it's like, oh, man, that's brutal. But, but also, we can call it here. That's fine. I think we got to a lot of a lot of good ground, I think. And, you know, we could always continue in the future. Like I said, you will, I will post this on my channel and people will see it. And I'll send you the link to the Discord because they will want to find you. Yeah. And someone will want to talk to you. And that's how this goes. Well, that's exciting. I'll be looking forward to that. Oh, good. Well, I hope you can do something about your headache. Yeah, yeah, I took, I took an ad or what do you call like Cedran before, before we started talking, but it seems to have failed me or something. Boy. Well, you take care of yourself, Adam, and take care of your father and your wife. And I wish you wish you well in terms of your church search. I mean, it's a horrible time to look for churches because I don't know how things are there. But things remain quite shut down here. So it's yeah, but at the same time, then everything's on the internet. So you can kind of get a window. So there's always upsides. Likewise, it was great talking with you. I really enjoyed your time, the conversation we were able to have all of it was excellent. Good. Good. Well, take care. It was pleasure to meet you, Adam. Yeah, nice to meet you too. Okay, bye bye. Bye bye.