https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=68TmTwf5clI

 Hi, this is Paul. I haven't done a monologue or a commentary video this week. I sometimes get sort of production constipated. It doesn't mean that I don't do conversations. I posted one Rando's conversation today. I'll post another one probably Monday or Tuesday because Monday's a holiday here in the United States. And I get that way often because I've got a video I want to do and I can't get it out. And I spent a lot of this week actually writing on CRC Voices, which is a listserv that I've mentioned before. It's a listserv that I've participated on for over 20 years. It's a group of friends. Right now, I'm young in that group actually. And we've been discussing the politics of the Christian Reformed Church around the same-sex marriage debate and the human sexuality report that's supposed to come to our binational synod coming up in 2022. And so I've been posting a lot and writing a lot on that and I've sort of wanted to make a video about that, but just things haven't sort of fallen together. And in the meantime, there's a whole bunch of other videos that are sort of stacked up in my head that haven't come to fruition. So if there's a pause, I'm either busy with stuff and I have been busy with stuff. And some of that detail will come out in some of the conversations. Talk about the Black Funeral that I was at this week when I talk about the music video, which is coming out next week. Video about music. You'll recognize it when it comes out. It's a Randall's Conversation. So sorry, because I know some of you like these kinds of videos. And it isn't that I'm not thinking and it isn't that I haven't been wanting to make videos. And quite frankly, I probably could have eeked out the time, but it's me making these kinds of videos is sort of a very muse-intensive thing. I get carried away by something enough to sit in this chair and in front of this microphone and talk at you about something. And I thought a great conversation with Tripp about Mars Hill. And I definitely have way more thoughts about Mars Hill. And now my sound is low. Nuts. One of the things I wanted to treat was what I thought was this very good conversation between Chris Williamson and the Black Funeral. And I think that's what I mentioned David Fuller over at Rebel Wisdom. And the video is entitled The Ethics of Alternative Media, Chris Williamson. Now, I subscribed to Chris Williamson's channel a while ago, partly because he had so much Jordan Peterson stuff on. But I didn't, and he, as David Fuller said, he's generally been talking to many of the same people that show up in Rebel Wisdom. He seems to be treating some of the same content. But I had no idea who the guy was. And I mentioned him sort of in passing on one of the videos that I made a couple of weeks ago. And YouTube now has this function where it sort of highlights comments from certain video makers so that I make sure to see them. And in the past, I saw this on my phone and some other video content, YouTube content creators had messaged me and I completely missed it. Anyway, but the comment he left on that video I thought was interesting and good, because I had said in the video basically, traditionally, religion has been the integrated management system. And he said, I absolutely agree. I also imagine I would be far less interested in discovering why I do the things I do if there was a cohesive meta-narrative already tying it all together. And I thought that was a good comment. And I actually had a lot of thoughts from that comment. I even thought about making just a shortish video on that comment, because in many ways, when I look at the work of John Vervecky, that is what John Vervecky and many others are trying to do. Of course, David Fuller and Rebel Wisdom is also in that environment, because in many ways, David's men's work is sort of analogous, again, to an integrated system that doesn't just do thinking, but does practice and community, because we need all of those things. So where do I intersect with these things? Well, for me, it's questions about the church. I know for a lot of you who are not Christians, who don't like the church or don't like Christianity, you'll probably skip a lot of those videos about Mars Hill, and fair enough. But the issues surrounding Mars Hill have everything to do with a conversation and a topic that I was dealing with a while ago, which are platforms. Because part of what we've seen throughout modernity is the proliferation of platforms. If you think, say, 5,000, 6,000 years ago, you had family, you had kin, you had your children, you had your grandparents, you had a family-based clan. Eventually cities would form, and cities probably began as cohesive kin groups. Empire is really, I'm thinking about Yuval Harari's book, Sapiens, Empire is really the transcending of kinship groups into larger structures. Sometimes through brutality, but there's a functionality to empire that Harari points to in his book, which I think is dead on right and indispensable. So empires sort of get a bad rap because they're coercive and often tyrannical and brutal, but empires accomplish things that kin groups can't. Now in my rough draft series, I'm during basically the summer, I'll be dealing with the Apostle Paul until I get to Advent. I know some of you who go to liturgical churches, like it when I work through the revised common lectionary because it's sort of fun to hear my take on these passages as compared to let's say the Bible, the Bible of the Lord, the Bible of the Holy Spirit, the Bible of the Holy Spirit. It's kind of fun to hear my take on these passages as compared to let's say your priest or your preacher if they are in fact giving homilies or sermons on the standard text that come through the revised common lectionary. But these, one way to understand the development of the church, and this is so critical with these issues that happen through Paul, is that what develops in the church is in many ways an alternative empire that lives alongside the state, sometimes challenges the state. And a lot of Tom Holland's work, especially his book Millennium, or it's got a different title in the United States, someone will put it in the comment section, deals with the struggle between these two empires. And I made a few videos on Constantine, and I really have to get back into Constantine because as Sam Adams often wins best comment in my book, Sam is just super smart, so I'm super glad he's in this community. But some of the comments that he made on the video I had about is Christianity revolutionary, Jonathan Peugeot says no, and Constantine was great, and Julian says yes, and Constantine was horrible, and I said Christianity's counter revolutionary, and let's not talk about Constantine. But Constantine is a tremendously important figure because it deals with this question of structure and platforms, because in many ways part of what the role of Constantine and Constantinople, which in some ways rivals Jerusalem at least for certain people in a certain time as the center of the world and kingdom come, is that we're dealing exactly with what Chris Williamson says here, I can't get my phone to open, Chris William says here as an integrated management system and as he said a meta narrative tying everything together, and in some ways especially for the orthodox church, that's a big deal, and so orthodoxy in some ways sort of like Aragorn and Frodo is the kingdom is lost and they're awaiting the return of the king, but this has had many permutations in the church, of course for Rome it's still Rome, for Protestants a video I had a conversation I had with Arando a long time ago, it's New Haven, Connecticut, or it's Plymouth, or in the Christian Reformed Church it's Grand Rapids, Michigan, or it's rival Susanna, Iowa, or it's rival Sacramento, California, one of my colleagues a church planter here once said we're going to grow Sacramento so big they'll have to have Senate here to save on costs, I don't see that happening, and so this conversation between Chris and David is dealing with structures and part of what happens in the main line which has a hierarchical structure when Nadia Bolzweber is voted up the top of the hierarchy of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of America, at least one of its synods, and Mark Driscoll for a while was sort of at the top of the non-hierarchical evangelical hierarchy and these emergence who complained and rebelled and pushed against big time church structures, well Mark sort of rose to the top and fell from it and Nadia Bolzweber has now received her coronation. But there are many structures and there are many platforms and part of what makes that story and the story of Mars Hill important is because even though Mike Cosper who is putting that series together is treating it now and then and I almost made a video basically commenting on the little short they put out about origin stories, there's so much going on here, and I think that's the difference here in terms of church and structure and what it is because obviously for Rome and for the Orthodox, those structures are fairly fixed and part of what happened in the Protestant Reformation and in the ongoing evolution of Protestantism is Protestantism has attempted to realize kingdom in vastly alternative and competing structures and what we're seeing now, to what degree and in what areas is Bishop Robert Barron more powerful than the Pope even though on the structure it's not a close thing. So this was a very long video and there are lots of interesting segments to it and I'm by no means going to comment on the whole thing because I just don't have that kind of time at this moment and as David sometimes notes when I do commentary on his video that my comments are twice as long than his video and that's very true and he's a good filmmaker and I'm not. But the beginning and perhaps some of the end I wanted to touch on and for those of you who don't know, I'm going to leave in some of the early parts because it introduces who he is and then David sort of sets up things so let's get into it. This is a conversation with Chris Williamson of the Modern Wisdom podcast. He's interviewed a lot of the same people like Jordan Peterson, Daniel Schmackenberger and Mark Manson and he's been a very good friend of mine and he's been a very good friend of mine and he's been a very good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and he's been a good friend of mine and you know to what degree is personal growth a mapping of and everybody likes to you know Jordan Peterson like to make a big deal of orthodox theosis not you know in some ways not terribly functionally different and of course a big part of you know one of the things that I'm constantly thinking of are these these dead reckoning these dead reckoning landmarks that we use for for figuring out trajectories and and again see Tom Holland's conversation with Glenn Scrivner on the relationship between Christianity and secularity and again see Tom Holland's conversation with Glenn Scrivner on the relationship between Christianity and secularity a state of sense making series because it's a fascinating dive into the process and the ethics of truth seeking now it's interesting because beauty truth and goodness David tends to focus much more on truth and sense making is in some ways parallel to this again this this attempt to think about dead reckoning within the iron box of secularism within the buffered self of figuring out the truth of secularism within the buffered self of figuring out what is true how can we together as communities figure out what is true and I really love where they end this because I think he's exactly right where where he and Chris end this conversation in this video because they both recognize that it actually takes a community and they emphasize some of the accountability and calling each other out and some of that but but I think the I think the I think the discernment that community affords is it goes way beyond that sense because in many ways its communities that determine an overton window its communities that that forward to us things up the salience landscape its communities that that very much determine what we think and what we know and what we frame and what we pay attention to and so you know again when when Jonathan Peugeot said to Jordan Peterson fans are not a church the church isn't just a pastor who who will call you out it's so much deeper and more subtle than that because you know as anyone who is managing the YouTube algorithm or the Twitter algorithm or any of these social media's know that that it's that they're constantly adjusting you know one of the books that I think I should probably reread again is you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book and you've read the book well I'm very happy to have a Yeah. And I am, this morning, I woke up early and I started getting back into Elul's propaganda, which is, even if you just read the introduction, it's profound and mind-blowing in terms of the shaping that our contexts do to us. And we know this when we hop contexts and go to different places. And sense-making in the alternative media space. We talked about how there's so much emphasis online on the free speech censorship binaries. And you know, sense-making in the alternative media space, I guess in many ways, I watch far more YouTube than mass media. Far more. And so that's being dished up to me, not by some editor in a newsroom, but by these algorithms. And increasingly, even mass media productions are served up to us by algorithms. Netflix is going to serve us some things. You know, my wife complained for years about cords. And so about a year ago, she demanded that I finally make good on years of promises that I get rid of cords. And I said, okay, well, that means we're going to have to buy a new TV. So my old plasma that everything was plugged into, which is still going strong, that went out and a new smart TV came in. So I could whittle the cords down to two, just to power cord. And I think it's just a power cord, actually. Everything's flowing through Wi-Fi. So even through that, so it's a Sony and so it's Android TV. And so through that, I mean, Google is serving me up stuff all the time. And actually, there's a lot of human selection going on because I get a lot of recommendations from you on the Discord server, on Twitter, just in conversation. So yeah, this is sense making is, I think it's a good word, but I think my view of it was far too narrow. And a focus on the big tech platforms are not nearly enough on wrestling with the question of how can we find truth? And what are the rights and responsibilities of people operating in the alternative outside the institutions? And again, how can we find truth? And you have to ask, well, what aspect do we mean by truth? You know, and right, we're sort of into four Vakey's, four P's, because truth has sort of a correspondence with physicality or, you know, David's listened to plenty of, plenty of Peterson and some of this comes through because Williamson's been, you know, delving into some of this stuff too. What I've really enjoyed about talking with Chris is that he's clearly taking these questions seriously and trying to act in an ethical way in an area where not everybody. And of course, ethics is hardly something to say, well, that's just something that we can throw on the table. And that's something that we know of that. That's that's all part of the that's all part of the knowing dilemma that has been fascinating David and David has been working through and in all of the stuff that he does. Is so I hope you enjoy the film. Chris, welcome. Thanks for having me. Why do we call it a film? He never put this on celluloid. So we've been in touch quite a bit over the last few weeks. Did he get that lamp from from Ben Shapiro, the same lamps Ben Shapiro uses? I know I should stop being so snarky. Formally talking through having some really great conversations. I hope we manage to kind of get close to it here, which is obviously going to doom us to not getting anywhere near. It's one of those ones where you wish you'd recorded the phone calls. Yeah, we should record the phone calls. And we've kind of touched on loads of different topics, mainly to do with the ethics of the alternative media space, problems of sense making. And it's been really interesting as well, kind of talking it through with you because you've got you've got a really popular channel, Modern Wisdom. It's the wisdom crew today. Yeah, you're right. Yeah. And you've interviewed some of the same people. You've obviously come to it from a very different. As for Vic, you've been on his channel? Background to me, I come from kind of legacy media, BBC Channel 4. I've got a sort of set of ideas, of protocols, of kind of ways of working that I'm still in a conversation around how much are they appropriate to the alternative media space. Yeah, maybe let's start by you maybe talk about kind of how you came to this, because it's obviously a very different background to mine. Slightly, yeah. Love Island isn't the same as doing journalism. So I did. I was a club promoter for a long time. I still am. I run events. I don't even know what a club promoter is. So I'll give another little confession. So I somehow, somewhere along the line, one of my feeds said that, was it FBoy Island, something like that, that that was going to sort of deconstruct some of these Love Island and Bachelorette shows. And so I thought, OK, I'll give that a look. And kind of a crazy program. I haven't seen it all, but I saw enough of it. And then at one point, they're trying to figure out who are the FBoys, and they're trying to figure out who are the nice guys. And someone said club promoter. And that was like warning. And it's, you know, I've I've never been to a club in my life. Confession. So I have no idea what a club promoter is or does. So I looked it up once and I still don't have a clear idea anyway. And I've done reality TV, clout chasing, sort of young guys stuff, and then realized it wasn't really fulfilling me in the way that I wanted it to. I like the money and I like the status, but it wasn't didn't sort of really hit me existentially. And I started a podcast to try and fill that void. And so far it seems to be working. Yeah. And I really like your. And I think, again, you know, talking platforms and church. It's a it's a very it's a very similar quest. And again, you know, I mean, I think briefly for David, Jordan Peterson sort of made David think, well, maybe maybe there's something to Christianity. I think for David, sort of like for Vickie, they might say that Christianity, I'm sure, works for some people, but there are issues and tell a pastor that there are issues. But but and so again, this this journey of discovery, creating a podcast. These these platforms and even the process of creating a platform, a successful platform and both of these two individuals have been successful in platform creation. I mean, platforms difficult because they're both dependent upon platforms like YouTube and Instagram and other social media. But but the the process of the journey of wisdom seeking or truth seeking sort of the frame that they're both they're both using is is meaningful and productive. I think they've I think they'll both they both say that having it is productive. And I'd have I'd have to confess here, too, that in some ways I've done a similar thing. I haven't really maybe I have looked to this channel in terms of a way of gaining wisdom, because I've certainly gained wisdom from you guys. And part of the reason I talk into this contraption and make these crazy monologue videos is because just just thinking quietly to myself in my head doesn't seem to provoke the same kind of flow states and insights as for some reason talking into this mic and having some of my consciousness, Congress sort of project my audience out there. And so I speak to you when I do this. So so so anyway, I you know, this question about church and platforms and, you know, integrating a meta narrative or into integrate. What did he say? I should I should memorize that. I got to keep hitting read more cohesive meta narrative already tying it all together. Maybe I'll maybe I'll screenshot that so I can find it more easily. And so the creation of rebel wisdom, of course, rebel wisdom is on one on one side, the films he puts out on another side. It's the digital campfire. And that's tied into sort of a network of these. And of course, the Stoa is out there and John Verveckis work and some of these individuals that they have and and then also the you know, the men's work, the retreats that they do. I mean, there's there's a lot more to rebel wisdom than just just what's going on in terms of the videos he creates and probably not as much for Chris Williamson. I don't know. And of course, for me, but but in my space, I very much think along the lines and leverage my experience with church. And this week, we just put out the Estuary Protocol video and more and more of our estuary groups are starting in U.S. and Canada and Europe. And I don't know if we have any in Australia and New Zealand. Yeah, we've got some in the leadership that are in Australia. And these are sort of tied to the church, but not necessarily in every case. So, you know, this is this is sort of what we're we're putting together. And, you know, estuary is intended to be a platform that's distinct from the church and separate from the church and in some cases alongside or downstream from the church. But, you know, we're all working in this and and we have the integration of these new technologies and attempting to surf the disruption of these new technologies. You're very personable with your with your guests. You've got a really nice rapport with them. And I think that really comes across in the interviews that you're doing. I think my style, certainly up until recently, has been a lot more kind of question based, but more journalistic. Like my background was much more about, OK, you have a set of questions and you're kind of trying to get some information. And I think my journey with this has been to bring a little bit more of myself into it, because I think that's more appropriate for YouTube. I think I've brought more of a kind of old school media. And I think that's true. And quite frankly, some of my favorite Rebel Wisdom videos are ones with David sharing what he's learned. And it doesn't that's not to take anything away from his guests. But in many ways, I think part of what happens with YouTube as with television, I mean, look at look at how big my face is in the frame. And, you know, when I first decided to do this channel, I did have some thinking about even though I said to Trip what I said to Trip in that in many ways, YouTube is sort of is a branch off of television. And if you know anything about television, the face is important. And so I think part of what makes Rebel Wisdom work is that the viewer, David is sort of a an avatar on upon which the viewer can project. And so I think I think David is one of the more convincing characters on Rebel Wisdom. Yeah, well, when you're used to being the center of the show, you have to actually take yourself out of it sometimes. So learning to ask questions, learning to pursue things, learning to be skeptical, you know, for a long time. And that's a really interesting point, because in many ways, David Fuller, as you can see in that little picture that he had, is was used to being behind the camera. And Chris Williamson was used to being in front of the camera. As a pastor, I'm used to being on stage behind a pulpit in a chair leading a small group of people or leading a congregation or leading a conversation. So it's interesting the different places that we went into this from. ...time, my job and many other people's normal jobs is actually around being agreeable. You know, if you're the owner of a business, you actually really, really don't want that bad TripAdvisor review. And I think that's a huge point, too, and very similar for pastors. Pastors have become hyper agreeable in this context, mostly because the demands of this narcissistic culture are that things be therapeutic, and therapeutic is assumed to be a sort of mirroring that, well, I agree with you and I agree with you. And so the amount of disagreement that you might be able to deliver in terms of what will be framed as personal growth has to very much be incremental. It has to very much be subtle. And there are people, and Peterson's one of them, that have sort of worked as more of a shock jock, and of course Mark Driscoll is part of that. But again, that's sort of the unlike between Mark Driscoll and Nadia Bolzweber, because Nadia Bolzweber, she sort of takes on much more of the I'm a victim like you in some ways, but then she also has her machismo that she brings into the frame, but in a more feminine space. So I think this observation by Chris is, I think, noteworthy. Do a lot of things. You try and find ways to sort of finagle the situation so that it's nice and calm and peaceful and make the other person happy. And then you get into the world where you need to be assessing very complex, deep, challenging topics with someone who is a specialist and you have just read the book. You've read a small portion of what they've done their entire life doing, and you need to somehow be at a level of skepticism and rigor and precision that you can hold them to account. And this is part of the reason I get messages from people, oh, you should have so-and-so on your channel. You should have so-and-so on your channel. And I'll make some exceptions for the likes of Tom Holland or Jordan Peterson, some of those individuals who are high status. But generally speaking, I don't want to do those kinds of things because Chris Williamson is right. And there's plenty of other people doing it and doing it far better than I would. So I'd rather they do it and I watch. And for me, what I do with these videos is, I think, much more helpful for me. It's a very steep learning curve. Yeah, and it's been really interesting in the conversations with you kind of reflecting on some of my assumptions for the first time because you've been like, oh, I haven't heard this before and we've kind of been exploring it together in a really interesting way. And it's basically the problem of truth seeking. And the problem of truth seeking outside the institutions is a completely new puzzle I think a lot of us are kind of figuring out. Now right there, it's very interesting because again, in many ways, the mother, there are a few others. I mean, Plato had his academy. But in many ways, the church is the mother of all truth seeking institutions from the medieval period into the modern period into the West, because of course, the university system grows out of the church. And in many ways, many of our contemporary institutions, including the press, when you listen to what David has to say here about the press, in church terms, it very much has a prophetic calling. Well, what do prophets do? Do they tell the future? That the role of the Hebrew prophets was to call often Israel's kings and Israel herself to account according to the terms of the covenant. And in the Hebrew scriptures, it's a written covenant. And in many ways, American constitution and some of these things are outgrowths from the Bible and they take on that shape. These things have been carried far beyond in the colonial period all over the world and have sort of become the way things work. So, the press in many ways are sort of a prophetic organ. And that word continues to have the same lexical, have a similar lexical range as you would have in biblical studies. And the one thing that I think people, probably if you're not a content producer yourself, you don't kind of wrestle with in the same way is like, so many of these come down to like individual moral decisions of the content creator. And like we kind of wrestle with those behind the scenes. And yeah, there's so many different factors that we're kind of bringing into play, like the people that we're interviewing, how we're interviewing them. And my overall concern, I've talked about the uncanny valley of truth seeking, which is the idea that we're, the legacy is kind of gone, like a lot of the legacy structures have gone, but we don't really have a workable alternative. We don't really, most interviewers are not asking challenging questions because you're in a very different dynamic. Like if you're working for the BBC or you're working for the New York Times, you can be very challenging with someone. They're going to say yes to the interview. And I thought this was a tremendous point. And again, sort of launching off sort of how they inherit the mantle of the church, but they do so in a market, in a marketplace. I mean, David Fuller isn't running the Spanish Inquisition, but the Wests, especially in the United States, the because the United States is a country born in rebellion and rebelled against the crown, rebelled against the church and rebels against the church came and founded the nation in New England to establish their own Constantinople, to establish their own kingdom of God on earth. So. You know, the questions that he raises there about institutions that the New York Times and BBC, these are these are gatekeepers, and because they're gatekeepers, everyone's going to have to deal with them. And, you know, part of my skepticism about new media versus alternative media versus mass media is Jordan Peterson wouldn't have been Jordan Peterson without Blue Church and mass media in many ways talking about him and and then attacking him. And so his his withdrawal from from mass media, partly because of his health, has consequences in terms of the. The presence of Jordan Peterson in the zeitgeist. But yet David's point is very true here. You know, one of the things that I caught on Twitter, I don't know the status of Peterson right now in terms of his health, but he was clearly feeling healthy and he was clearly on Twitter himself. Reached out to Elon Musk and asked for an interview and I thought heat check. What I mean, heat check. Well, in basketball, if you're if somebody is just dropping three point shot after three point shot, you know, it's like, do I dare take another one? How hot am I? And I haven't seen an interview with Elon Musk. I don't know if Elon Musk would say yes, it's a status measure. And. David Fuller is right, and one of the things that. I've noticed and I is that Jordan has not been on David's channel is that because of what David had to say about Dave Rubin and Jordan Peterson and Dave Rubin are friends because this social media's work via social connections, connections, connect works. Hey, new word. Good one. Connect works. I coined it here first. And he's right in his point here, although Jordan Peterson has basically said, but I'm not after after this disastrous things with the times of London. No, I don't trust you. I'm not going to talk to you anymore. And people have people have made those choices, and it's not an unwise choice. You've got the weight of an institution behind you. If you do that as a young up and coming podcast host, you're going to find people stop returning your calls. Some of the challenging interviews I've done in the past, like with Dave Rubin, for example, have had consequences, had consequences with with other people in the ecosystem who were friends with Dave, for example, who. And this, again, is in alignment with with the prophetic history in in the Hebrews, in the Hebrew scriptures, where prophets die outside of Jerusalem. If you're if you're going to seek the truth or hold people to account or to covenant faithfulness. Yeah, it isn't liked. And there's there's a lot of that written in in the Bible. King Ahab, I'm not going to talk to him because he never tells me what I want to do. I lost contact with that kind of thing. So I've been I've had my own journey of kind of wrestling with, well, this particular person, I feel like there's some questions I really need to ask them. And I've actually found that Americans are not so good at dealing with challenging questions. Brits are a little bit better. The interview I have with the trigonometry guys was probably the first one that was a real like spa that felt like we were still talking to each other after the the Dutch, the Dutch like the Dutch like to go at it hard. Trust me. If you I'm a couple and they're like, I think we've got a healthier culture in the UK of that sort of. It's taking. Yeah, piss taking. And I think there's a longer tradition of it in. It's so funny. I had when I was in the Dominican Republic. Check bingo. We had we had friends of ours who were from the UK and all this language we never knew piss taking. It's like we don't we don't have that term. David Fuller's point in our journalism and our politics, which can become performative. Like the the Kathy Newman interview was the perfect example of like the Jeremy Paxman. I'm going to find out why these lying bastards are lying to me and put words in their mouth, kind of coming to its kind of natural conclusion. Like that that was a very British. She was she used to be a political reporter. And the political reporters are all about trying to catch you out on their work, on your words and and kind of just going after you in a very terrier like fashion. And it becomes performative. And it's like, which is why I also use the word uncanny valley, because it looks like truth seeking, but it's not like the uncanny. Uncanny Valley means it's something that looks almost human, but it's kind of it's got that kind of weird like dislocation feeling. And I think a lot of our institutions have become facsimiles of truth seeking that look like they're trying to do truth seeking, but they're not. And it's like this weird kind of sick, almost kind of nauseating feeling when you interact with them. So it's got those kind of two different meanings. One of the interesting that's interesting, he's he's looking for words. It looks like truth seeking, but it's not. And again, that's if you read the Book of Kings and the interchanges between kings and prophets, lots of lying prophets, lots of lots of people who are trying to tell the king what the king wants to hear, because then you get invited to the king's table and nothing new under the sun. And things that we've brought up in our conversations is what you said there about playing the game. To what degree of game playing is it permissible? Because you could be the hard nosed, sceptic, contrarian, pushing as hard as you want. But if your channel isn't sufficiently large to move under its own momentum anymore, you have neutered your ability. You can only do that within a certain number of circles so many times before people stop picking up the phone. Yeah, he's exactly right. And yet there is a very passionate contrarian community on the Internet that likes to see dunking. And this point, I mean, this is this is this little section in here was why I really wanted to do this video, because I thought of just making a clip of it and I still haven't figured out what to do with my clip channel. But this point is so on one hand, you've got, well, you'd better you'd better kiss up. But everybody on the Internet loves you to kick up. You know, it's usually kiss up, kick down. Everybody loves you to kick up. And, you know, that's that's the part of our culture. You know, we love the underdog who punches up and dunk pornography. They're just there for the got you moment. They want the Dave Rubin clips owned channel. Right. That's what these people look at. What happened with Brendan Schaub's Fighter and the Kids subreddit? Like that is the most passionate subreddit I've ever seen. And it's people dunking on them. But there isn't an equivalent community that's that bound together on the positive side of anything because the Internet is so grift aware. OK, so again, my favorite Peugeot video. Parasitic processing or parasitic storytelling. I love what he says here, and he's exactly right. I'm going to listen to it again. It was so good. Like the kids subreddit, like that people for the likes to see dunking. It's like dunk pornography. Dunk pornography. I just got to pause and say that in my head. So I remember it. Dunk pornography because he's exactly right. They're just there for the got you moment. They want the Dave Rubin clips owned channel. Right. That's what these people look at. What happened with Brendan Schaub's Fighter and the Kids subreddit? Like that is the most passionate subreddit I've ever seen. And it's people dunking on them. But there isn't an equivalent community that's that bound together on the positive side of anything. And that's where you get this this theme. It's a part of part of my problem with making all these videos and why there's such a disaster. Is. So, you know, I'm thinking about and I was really pushing hard on the group that wants to sort of change the the the the line, the sexual standard, the traditional sexual standard in the Christian form church. And I basically my challenge is show me the new line. I've made this point before on this channel. I see I see what's wrong with the old line. I see the suffering and the difficulty that that many are experiencing. But show me the new line. And they really can't the best they might come up with is consenting adults. But I can very quickly give a number of extremely believable situations, which demonstrates how consenting adults will not work in a church. Why? This gets into the platform. This gets into the question of, OK, the prophetic stance of the institution and the wrestling between institutions that that these guys are doing. Can we go without an institution? What if I am the institution? You know, if we found out that David Fuller and Chris Williamson were in some ways betraying in their personal lives a lot of even what their channel implied was the telos and the goal of their channel. If Chris Williamson has a channel about wisdom and self-improvement. But, you know, in his real life, all he does is, you know, he's drunk and and play is covered with Cheetos dust playing video games all the time. He's got no personal interest in self-interests. Suddenly it's like, are your channels void? And, you know, you can make up a story about David Fuller, too, if we discovered that the real David Fuller behind the mask had, you know, wasn't at all interested in truth seeking or sense making. Well, the channel is done. So. This this dunk pornography and the fact that you can you can amass you can amass a tremendous channel. Via reactivity, because it's it's a lot easier to establish a coalition against than a coalition for and this actually gets down then into this is Christianity revolutionary, because. Essentially, what Peugeot is saying is that you need a line. And in many ways, what Christianity, at least our contemporary Christianity, has said is that. The pinnacle of. The expression of what human sexuality should be about is male, female monogamy, child producing, that's the pinnacle. Now you have to understand what standards are and what standards aren't. And there are many standards of humanity that I will never achieve. I will never be at the pinnacle of brilliance. I will never be at the pinnacle of fitness. I will never be at the pinnacle. I will never be at the pinnacle of anything. But yet there is there are implicit hierarchies and there are implicit standards and part of how we judge each other and as Peterson says, either push each other up the hierarchy or evaluate each other or look to each other or aspire to be like images and aspects that we see in others, even if they can only maintain it fleetingly. You know, when I was young, watching Dr. J. Sore and and Dunk, it was like, wow, and then Michael Jordan and then LeBron James and others and others. But but Dr. J. can't do what he did. Michael Jordan can't do what he did. And even LeBron James now can't do what he did. But but yet these these forms, these ideals continue to live on and we continue to try to we aspire to try to. To try to live them out and and so, yes, you can you can establish tremendous communities around reactivity and negativity, but those communities can never last because let's say if one of the if one of the competitors or sub communities within that negative community then is at the center, well, then you have a new negative community looking to bring that down, which makes longstanding dynasties, you know, like like Caesar Augustus, let's say, a truly remarkable thing, because critique as you would and should the the reign and morality of Caesar Augustus is quite a considerable feat. So. Part of what we're doing is sort of surfing on the dunk pornography. And I know if, you know, that's certainly an element of Jordan Peterson. It's part of why he, you know, people would coalesce around him because they'd be against the main thing, the thing at the center. And unless but Peterson didn't just stop there, he gave people something. And and unless you give people something, if all you are is a reactive element, you're you're always going to be a role player. Because the Internet is so grift aware, like their their shill radar is on hypersensitive. And I think, again, another tremendous point, the Internet is so grift aware, the show radar is hypersensitive. And and that's a real issue in looking at the rise and fall of Mars Hill. And as I think about how I want to treat that, because. There is so much reward in seeking this, but you can't live that way. And and again, you. You can't live that way and in any attempt to do so, I think in some ways, when you look at, let's say, the trajectory of Milo, I mean, he embodies it in some ways, purer than anyone else. The Milo Roush V. You know, that it was taken down from YouTube, you can still find it on bit shoot. But. And I in one of the pieces that I wrote, I said, you know, look at these two guys, I don't know that either of these men are necessarily to be esteemed. And in many ways, their conversation was tedious. But they they they're also emblematic of the fact that at some point you have to realize that. Embodyment of the ideal and striving to embody the ideal to the degree that you can. In the world that we have right now is. Is a path worth work taking, even if the numbers who want to do dunk pornography and who declare you as grifter is, you know, it's worth enduring those things. And it's very unfair on the positive side of anything, because the Internet is so grift aware, like their their shill radar is on hypersensitive and it's very uncool to be positive, it's very cool to dunk. But you as a creator have to make a decision. OK, like if I want to get myself to a size of a channel where I can actually start asking hard questions and get access to the people that are really interesting, like I need to play this game a little bit. Yes, I don't want to compromise myself and completely roll over and let anybody do whatever they want to me on camera on my on my show. But similarly, I can't push as hard as a Jeremy Paxman, you know, when you've got prime time. And then on top of that, another layer is that we're practicing in public as creators, we are practicing on the stadium floor every single time that we do it. I do an interview with Jordan Peterson and I don't get to say, right, Jordan, I want to speak to you on Monday at 630 p.m. We'll go for an hour and a half, then I'll go away. We'll run the drills. Yeah, we'll practice how it's going to go. The dance routine can be can be rehearsed. And then on the Tuesday, we'll actually we'll go again. It's like, no, no, no, this is happening live, riding the crest of now. You don't get to have a practice go at this. So the audience needs to be aware of the fact that a lot of creators are developing their skill set as they go. Yeah, maybe they didn't say the thing that you wanted them to say. Maybe in retrospect, they didn't say the thing that they wanted to say. But you've got all manner of levels of complication here. What skill set does the particular interviewer have? What biases do they have coming in? What knowledge do they have about the particular conversation you're talking about? Are they actually quick enough and capable enough of seeing this? Sam Harris, in his most recent AMA, talks about the fact that there is a degree of uncertainty when you have a conversation live with someone which lends a sense of credibility to whatever the other person is saying. And typically, if you are the person with the show, you are a good avatar for something close to the layperson and you're trying to eke out of someone that's a specialist, they're going to run rings around you in their specialist area. I mean, the work that you've done digging into COVID vaccines, ivermectin, that is very sophisticated. But the only reason you've been able to do that is because you've dedicated quite a lot of time to it. You've gone really, really deep in and you can't do that for every single thing that you're going to speak about. So although we need to have high standards, we want to hold people to account, we need to make sure that the content that's being produced is of the best quality. There are a lot of layers and filters and just saying bad faith or grifter or this person isn't acting in the way that they should. It's too simplistic of an argument. Which is the issue with doing this outside the institutions. And it was something I spoke to Eric Weinstein about quite recently. And it actually gave me a little bit of permission to give myself a bit of a break because I think I have come in with a sort of set of assumptions to do with legacy media. And there are things that we've talked about and you're like, I've never heard of anyone doing this before. Like, for example, write a reply. What's that for the people that don't know? Write a reply. Basically, the idea is that... And he gets into a bunch of things here. And again, I thought the entire conversation was really great. But I do want to skip over to the end. And then it all just... He just... Kind of roll... ...freedom platform. He rolled it out. He got nearly a million dollars. He's talking about Brian Rose and some stuff going on in the UK. Are you going to get off your knees? Are you going to let the big tech platforms dictate to you? Are you going to... He played that like a fiddle. So that, to me, is something that everybody needs to be very cautious of. Because this in-group and out-group dynamic is something that gets weaponized very, very easily. And this is why the sort of dunking mentality of the Internet can be really dangerous. Because what you're bonding with other people over is hatred of an out-group, not shared love of an in-group. And that's like... It's weak, as in it doesn't bind... Yeah, correct. It's fragile. It doesn't bind together very well. It gives you all of the... It's temporary. It's always dependent. It's always dependent on another. That's why it's fundamentally parasitic. Sensitive community without any of the things that community is supposed to give you, like you're not actually coming together around anything that's shared other than hatred of something else. But that can be really, really super powerful. And that was what I saw. That was what I felt. I'm like, oh, this could be it. I could get... You know what I mean? I could get everyone around me because easy narrative, lazy thinking, limbic hijack, there we go, the man shutting me down, Douglas Murray, bit of clout, small podcaster from the north of England cancelled for a laugh. And you just think, there it is. Recognising that and recognising that as an audience member as well. Like, look, am I in love with this creator or am I simply hating the out-group that they keep on pointing at? Because those aren't the same thing. Yeah, I also wanted to pick up on something we talked about a bit, about kind of the social dynamics of... Because the other thing that YouTube has done, especially with the kind of the rise of the public intellectuals on YouTube and elsewhere, is this sort of sense of there's a lot of people who maybe have become popular for the very first time. And you see these kind of warping effects of fame and these warping effects of people probably in their 50s, 60s becoming kind of something that they never had in... Like Joe Rogan is a good counter example, I think, of someone who is able to stay grounded despite all of his success, because you get the feeling he's always been a jock. Yeah, he's always been sort of top of the tree in various ways. Whereas I've seen with so many of these other figures that it just either goes to your head or you get pressures that you just don't know how to deal with. And it certainly becomes... It seems to become a kind of, yeah, really dangerous terrain when you sort of step into that state. And, you know, I mean, Jordan Peterson comes to mind, of course, because the status rocket that he rode and what it cost him and you know, again, Peugeot's conversation with Peterson about what do you need around you? And certainly, you know, Peugeot, you need a community, you need... You know, part of the reason Nadia Bultzweber has not self-destructed the way Mark Driscoll is, to a degree, the function of at least a hierarchy in a community that her tradition is nested in, you know, whatever you think of the you know, of the content or the agendas that she's pushing. Driscoll didn't have that. Driscoll had fans. Driscoll had a marketplace. Driscoll sort of... Driscoll sort of... Yeah, I thought Tripp said it very well. He wanted to attract to himself all of these A type leaders, but then he didn't want any of them to be that way with him. And it's a classic authoritarian dilemma because at some point the the dictator is going to be pulled down. This is a hell of a drug, man. Like, if you are someone that has spent a lot of your life feeling like you had talent, but the world didn't recognize it, like you could have, would have, should have been something. And then finally, the world recognizes what your your brilliance. Yeah, I mean, that's that's powerful. That's very compelling. And it's hard to not start believing your own height. How do you how does anyone remain humble like that? You know, and it's... And again, you're talking like this and it's like, I don't know, we've had thousands of years of talking about this, not only as as communities that are that are horizontal, but but vertical through time, and it has a lot to do with. An integrated metanarrative and and understanding what idolatry is. And again, that doesn't mean that that the church and people in the church haven't failed in this dramatically and publicly again and again and again. Part of what's what's going on, of course, in the rise and fall of Mars Hill, evangelical mega churches is that. In many ways, the the traditional structures were intentionally cast off and. This was I don't know if I kept any of those books, but this was basically the thinking in. The mega church body of. Publications book after book after book would come out in that period. And, you know, I would say pretty much the same thing. And, you know, everyone, non denominational churches were the ones that would would explode, of course. It's not easy. I mean, again, you know, to not bring up Love Island one too many times more. But you see this with people that are plucked out of obscurity. And then six weeks later, given two million followers and an entire country knows their name. These people are not built to deal with this. Now, roll that forward. You see it in sports double their life or maybe triple their life. These 20 year olds to people that are old and maybe they've spent their entire careers working away as research assistants or, you know, hardcore academic texts. You think finally now you have never had status in the way that you've wanted it. And if there's one thing that I notice with pastors, too, but really with academics, I mean, they've like he said, they've toiled and toiled and toiled in this small area of the garden. And now and if you talk to them about their work, they're in love with their work. Well, this is what I talked about in my question and answer on flow states. Part of the reason, you know, you sort of need a flow state to get into the groove to create something. And then as Anne Lamott, is it Bird by Bird? You know, often I'll come back to the part of the reason I work on sermons throughout the week and not just that one sitting is I fall in love with the thing that I do and I can't see it. I see it as a parent sees a child. And I've told the story before I had a friend who was a kindergarten or first grade teacher and they'd come in for. Parents would come in for for teacher conferences and the parents are just sitting there waiting to hear that their child is a revelation and the brightest child that the teachers ever had. And they're they're looking for the teacher to just give all glory law and honor to the child and the teacher says, your child's doing fine. It's their child and so academics, so it's their work. Yeah, OK. That's that's that's part of the deceit of the flow state. Now you're put at the top of a mountain. What do you do? How do you stop your ego from getting out of control? What control mechanisms do you have? And now everybody's looking to you as some sort of sense maker. Like it's. It deserves sort of sympathy from us for the person that's in that situation. I know that's a very unpopular view. I think, oh, how hard is it to have all of these views and have all of these people listening to what you say, but all of the pressure is now on that person to be some sort of omnipotent. Epistemic authority is the is the words that my friend Peter uses. Epistemic authority means someone who kind of says, believes that they are able to articulate kind of how it is in a way. But you have the authority to to to. But that's essentially what should be ontological authority, if it's how it is or epistemic, how we know the public intellectual is. And it's something I find very. But I see myself much more as a curator. I think when it comes to some of these topics about. The media landscape, I start to come more into my kind of area where I feel like I've got some more insight. Just if I didn't put them, then maybe others do. But generally, I've avoided that. Like, I don't consider myself an epistemic authority. Like I consider someone like Eric Weinstein or Daniel Schmachtenberg or Jordan Hall, like those kind of people, you put it, you put the microphone in front of them and they tell you what they think, they tell you what they think. And it's always fascinating. It's brilliant. It's it's kind of like they are epistemic authorities. But everybody has bounds. Everybody has these boundaries and learning where they are. If you are catapulted to the top of the mountain of status, how do you keep that under control? Everybody thinks that my view on the vaccine is correct. So maybe I should start talking about abortion or marriage or gun rights or politics or maybe I should start this party or maybe I should do whatever like this is. It's hard to learn where the boundaries of your own competence lie. Yeah. And it's compounded by the platforms. It's compounded by the infinity of feedback that we get now in the digital media landscape, which means we're able to we get an infinity of input so we can pretty much screen out the bad stuff and just we still get an infinity of positive reinforcements, like that's why it's so ungrounding to be in that position. We we've got we're not we're not. And again, you know, I look at this and and I think these are some of the advantages of historic religious communities, because one of the one of the big tyrannies is the tyranny of the now and the now is getting with the with the acceleration of. Of technology and knowledge now is getting increasingly shorter and which means that you need long term filters and you need communities to filter and it's not just filtering knowledge as such in terms of the propositional P or the kinds of things that you can put down. And of course, David knows this. I mean, you need you know, there is practice there. There are. You know, there are worlds of nuances that we pick up and that are mapped into us that maybe are beneath the level of what we can articulate, but we know it and we act through it and we don't even do what we're doing. And so. And we are all connected into communities at one level or another. The newsroom at BBC four or whatever they called it was one. And there was a tradition and there was wisdom and and there was wisdom there that David picked up. There's even wisdom on Love Island, because that's I would imagine I've never. I know it. I know it might come as a deep surprise to all of you. I have never been a star on a romantic reality TV show. And if you knew me in my 20s, you would know why. But anyway, there's wisdom even on the set of Love Island and it's built into. It's built into the people, the producers carry it, the tech, the the technical people carry it, you know, even the even the 20 somethings that have had for a very short time, a tremendous amount of because I'm using the Old Testament definition of wisdom, which is excellence in many ways. They've they couldn't necessarily tell you what to do, but they can sort of a b test, say, and that's a good look. That isn't that looks better than this. I mean, even young people have had those filters honed. And so to get to the top of the hierarchy, there's all of this built in there. And so I think. Part of the challenge is, well, you want you want broader and older and you want to figure out how. You can. You know, I think about Jonathan Heights, Happiness Hypothesis, which I think is the best of his books that I read. It was the first one. And often you get that with the first book because somebody's been sitting on that egg a long time and it's kind of like new preachers trying to get their first sermon out. There's just a dying to fill everything into the first sermon. Sometimes it's a disaster. Sometimes it goes OK, but then they get it out. It's like, OK, we're going to do this again next week. I've been working on this sermon for 10 years. Yeah, I know it showed, but and there might be a ton in it. So so that part of what Jonathan Hite was doing in there was saying there's all of this ancient wisdom, but how do we have time to sift the ancient wisdom? And how do we something Brett Weinstein says all the time? How do we how do we figure out what to sort of accentuate and what to sort of? How to arrange the hierarchy with with whatever these things are, because, again, they're not all propositional, not designed to deal with that level of input. And so because of our confirmation bias, because of a kind of narcissism and all of these things, which all of the platforms are deliberately designed by Stanford engineers to weaponize and to work on. It's a losing battle. And when he says weaponize again, this is a term that we use often. But but what it means is. It's a very sharp term, but Google, Google wants to keep me on YouTube. So I'll watch more commercials, so I will, you know, keep me on YouTube and off Facebook and it's weaponized for the the war of for their corporate war and for their stockholders. It's what it's there for. Like we are so we're all completely ungrounded in this in this because of because of the nature of these platforms. Which is why I think you ultimately this conversation ends for me with, as it does with Daniel Schmackenberger, is with personal growth. I think we need to have again sort of a facsimile for theosis, for sanctification, for but but. That's highly individual as well. A much more sophisticated conversation, a much more sophisticated understanding of our own drivers to really start looking at our own drivers, build real mortification, be trusted relationships, really deep trust. Coinonia, I mean, it's just this is just the this is exactly what religions and particularly church has been doing, because church church, even though it's it's fairly individualistic and in the individualistic cultures of the West, it's also deeply communal. So relationships with others who can call us out on our bullshit, who can tell us when we're getting over when we're kind of starting to lose it. Like I see. And again, it's. Because people are so hard to talk to and in the ways that they need to be talked, spoken to. All of those, all of that sense of. All of that calibration is is again built into an integrated system that is designed to achieve a tell us. And. You know, it was interesting in my conversation with Trip, he kept saying godliness, and I just for the purpose of that conversation, kept my mouth shut. But if I was going to do a commentary on one of my own conversations, I would pause there and say, now, we're going to have to think about what we mean by that term, because that's personal growth, we want we want to be godly. Well, what have we got? We want to be godlike. What does that mean? We want in some ways for our characters to mirror the characters of God. Well, well, which God and what God and what God what is that God like? Our growth is so nebulous and the community, which is recalibrating. All of our implicit assumptions, perhaps so deep that we don't even know what they are. Are being fine tuned by again, these algorithms that are designed to draw attention in order to achieve commercial goals, don't see the kind of stuff that I'm aware of from particularly men's work, like doing kind of we've led men's men's retreats for a while. We do exercises where like, OK, learn to take like proper feedback, get those really deep relationships with other men where you can call each other out on your bullshit. You can you can kind of loving but firm accountability and. It's all comes out of the church. I mean, church has been doing this for generations. The monastic movement. Talk about talk about pervasive men's work, monasteries and the deep kind of you need to be able to do the kind of inner work of like real self reflection, real self reflection, real kind of awareness of like, how am I being hijacked? I was that. Oh, wow. That's that thing from school coming up again. Like I'm recognizing I don't see. And again, so then the question is, well, where where are your guiding lights? Well, those are those epistemic authorities, as he said. OK. Where from them is is that is that situation? I don't think any of us can do it. And this is maybe getting more into a more interesting area than the idea of creating a sort of code of conduct, I think, because culture eats strategy for breakfast anyway. So how can we create a culture of people where we have those kind of relationships? Well, man, the difference between having a rote set of rules that everybody has to adhere to and some kind of very bureaucratic way of deploying them versus having a Slack channel that's got all of the people that would have been in that the social pressure that you would get, the desire to conform in the right way would be much more scalable than trying to come up with one rule for every single different way that it's going to go, because you're going to know when you look at Verveckis talk and awakening from the meaning crisis about rules is exactly right, because there's more packed in. And Peterson and his first biblical series video, there's more packed into these movements, into our movements, into our actions. That's a story is an astounding compressive compression engine. But action itself is. And there's so much packed in. And so. You know, we by nature, we do this, we've, you know, we've got images of our parents inside of us, we've got images of our teachers, we've got images of our schools. A school spirit has penetrated us pervasively. You've got it wrong, even if the people that you're speaking to can't quite precisely tell you how you've got it wrong. Make you're off the mark there. Why? OK, well, here's the closest approximation I can find. Could you put it into rule? No. But could you tell me so that I believe you and so that I don't do it again? Yes. So I think I think that would be a much more effective control mechanism. Another thing to consider as well is I wouldn't call it control mechanism. I think that that systems mechanism and no like flight guidance. Yeah, it's more like that for me feels like the wrong attitude. It's not like it's not the id or the sorry, it's not the superego kind of pressing down. Yeah, it's more a kind of it's more kind of helpful reflection. I mean, that's the other thing at some point, if you get if you get deep enough. And it's also a traction to see the power of someone doing it right. I forget exactly what Peterson said. It was in his conversation with Peugeot about attention, you know, that that's that that's nearly worship. And so, you know, Dr. J inspired inspired Michael Jordan and Michael Jordan inspired. LeBron James and you know, why why does everybody want number 23 on their jersey? There's something about excellence that somehow when we see it and again, this is not independent of all of this formation, it pulls us up into it. Enough interpersonal growth is like you start to desire those kind of relationships. You start to desire those kind of reflections like please show me my blind spots. The drawback is there's a lot of people who I hear saying those words who I don't think signal a good thing. Well, I don't I think we also bullshit ourselves. We also get to the point where we're like, no, we were, you know, what I really want. I really want feedback. I really want to engage my critics. And ultimately, we end up bullshitting ourselves. There's some reason why we can't engage this particular critic or this particular critic, and and there's a reason why that piece of feedback doesn't land particularly or you've got me wrong this time or whatever. It's like like we've got it's it's really, really hard. And I don't know how we do it outside. Outside of those kind of trusted relationships, I don't think we can do outside those trusted relationships. Another thing that you could propose would be for the audience to be better of themselves would be look like if you are listening to your favourite creator week in, week out, I'm sure it's the same with you guys. One message from someone that says, hey, man, I listened to your episode with Yonmi Park or with Danny Trejo or whoever. And it was it was awesome. That's worth ten thousand plays, fifty thousand play because it really does because the plays are constantly coming, but the messages are different. And then the times when I've had long, well thought out, obviously well meaningful, effortful messages from people that have said, hey, man, I listen every week to Modern Wisdom. You you're wrong about this. You're off the mark. I'll take my time to reply. I'll put it into an if it's an Instagram DM, I'll pull it across into my emails. Can I have your email? I want to reply to this in full on a on a proper keyboard. So the audience has an obligation. Well, they don't have an obligation, but they have the opportunity to contribute here. Do you want your and I, you know, I have to credit you who who listened to this channel, I mean, so many of your comments are helpful. I've grown so much from reading your comments. But but again, as Peugeot said to Peterson, you know, the little tidbits I get from you are good, but what we get from each other and learn from each other when we're knit together in a in a community, a community that goes through time and are and have, as Chesterton said, you know, we have our those who have gone before us around the table and they get a voice in terms of figuring out what to do here and now is vital. So anyway, I thought this I thought this whole conversation was great. I really, I really appreciated it. So, you know, good, good on these guys. And I'm out of time right now. Got a council meeting tonight, but I don't know if I'll post this tomorrow or maybe this will be my Monday video. Anyway, thank you for your time and attention. Leave a comment. Let me know what you think.