https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=h0k7GZTG0kg

 Hello friends Andrea with the bangs here and there's been a disturbance in the Twitter verse So for those of you who haven't been keeping up with what's going on There's been some talk by our friend. Mr. Brett Weinstein member of the IDW speaking about well about Jesus Speaking about good old Jesus and what he means to Christians so I actually spoke a few days ago with Paul VanderKlay and we discuss the meaning crisis and we look at Christianity as an Answer to the meaning crisis. It's not your average. Let's just look in the Bible and you've got your easy peasy answer No, no, we go into it. We look at the history of the search for meaning we look at Why it isn't as easy as it seems even if you do have an answer and fall and have faith and whatnot and I go through some of my own doubts and it was just a really good talk We speak about the things that Brett brings up. So it's long guys so I I just hope that okay, you can't watch all of it At least watch however much you can and then go to the last 10 minutes because the sum up is pretty good. So Anyway, I'm gonna stop talking so you can get to the episode and let us know what you think as usual And if you are new and you think what I'm doing is worthwhile, please don't forget to like and subscribe subscribe Thanks You Hello Paul Should I call you Andrea? Yes, call me Andrea. Okay. Yeah. Well, okay I know cuz it's not true right now. I put them back. I don't okay. I've been asked Well, some people said that they don't believe I have a forehead So is it Andrea or Andrea? Okay, so I've done actually this before as well. It's Andrea Andrea, okay Andrea So Andrea sounds very exotic and lovely but that's just not my name Andrea. All right, Andrea, so you can call me Andrea and like my friends call me and as well Then calls me ampersand It's up to you you can just call me Andrea or and I don't people think and is weird But it's just like my my nickname, but but you go by Paul, correct? I go by Paul I know I just have all these like cutesy little like well, I mean you can call me this or just call me Andrea But miss bangs is more for like bangs is my Twitter persona Okay, people like it. So I just like okay, but we'll see if I get heretical status from from this So, okay so the reason why I wanted to talk with you is because There's been a lot I mean it actually just I thought of talking with you for a while and I just I usually wait for an angle to Come up, but there's been a lot of religious talk on Twitter thanks to a Brett Weinstein as most of the viewers know Talking about Jesus Oh Jesus just can't keep him down Oh, but who do you say that he is Paul? Well, that's what I'm preaching about. So, okay. So here's the thing Okay, you did a whole video and I started watching actually watched like about 20 minutes of it before cuz I only had so much Time to prepare because we only just figured this out yesterday. So, okay, and I do very long videos Next time Paul, okay. So here's the thing. I Have been doing a series about oh, I've been touching on meaning but I've really been looking at things about the IDW but I kind of feel like the IDW is an Not answer It's an answer to symptoms of the meaning crisis Does that make sense? And so I want to know so there are a few things I want to kind of go with you I want to I do want to get to the this sort of religion me Brett Weinstein talk not just him but the the subject that's been brought up on Twitter that people have been Discussing but I do want to talk about What do you think is going on in terms of the IDW? Answering the meaning crisis if that makes sense and how is it answering that? Do you have thoughts on that? Oh I that I have thoughts on everything and if you watch my channel, you'll learn that I don't I I said so the IDW is something that was coined by Brett's brother Eric and I Think in some ways the IDW is more political Okay, religious. I thought it was more cultural Cultural I think especially for the the kind of attention Let's say Andrew Yang is getting from Eric and I see I in my how to categorize the IDW I think for the most part they are in many ways like myself people who had traditionally been voted Democratic Probably more to the left politically, okay for whom? The there's been a degree of alienation by The rise of woke culture yes, and that's very much seen I the way I the way I relate politics and religion is that politics is now and religion is always and So they are connected, but I think politics is almost always downstream from religion and culture and Always much narrowly more narrowly focused and more particular so I You know Eric coins this phrase and it sort of Takes on some resonance sufficient to that the New York Times publishes a piece about it but the more I listen to its various members and Where I see they've gotten their traction, you know Ben Shapiro Although Ben is always he's always I mean it's a fairly diverse bunch So Ben is over obviously on the right a right wing pundit Jordan Peterson who's Canadian so he's kind of out of the ballpark, but appeared regularly on Fox News for a while But if you look at Sam Harris Eric and Brett Weinstein all of them in a sense they are refugees from the left who sort of like Dave Rubin Feel on the political outs and are looking to create a new path. I Don't see now Jordan Peterson Very much is front and center in the meeting crisis because the heart of Peterson's message Wasn't primarily political although he plays plenty on that on that Strain and gets pulled over there by Rubin and the Weinsteins and and goes there himself often I think the heart of Peterson's work has been he's attempting to help individuals Basically get out of Neolistic depression and being stuck Yeah, and so that's but you know, it was really John Verbeke when I started listening to his awakening from the meaning crisis that that meaning crisis term Really sorted to bring things better into focus in terms of the culture Okay, and the truth is we've been in a meaning crisis for a long time It sort of ebbs and flows if you look at the Inklings, for example CS Lewis Tolkien Owen Barfield and And then you know Charles Williams and a number of others who aren't as aren't as famous They also were addressing the meaning crisis post World War one into the Second World War Okay, so these issues have been around in the culture for a very long time Well, I mean we look at Nietzsche Or Nietzsche, I believe it's pronounced. Okay. I got I get scolded I get scolded on that in the comment section my channel. So I mean he He was in in a way of I mean prophetic in in understanding there was a crisis before the public realized it seems and I actually spoke with someone Steven Klaus. He's a He's a Dude going for his philosophy PhD. He's doing his dissertation right now He's been off of Twitter. I really want to interview him again But he's writing his dissertation and has said he's got to do that before he does in more interviews but he and I spoke about he's very interested in Nietzsche and what that perspective is and he's he's a specialist in Aristotle along with founding fathers understanding of Aristotle Interesting and yeah, it's very interesting overlap there. But he also was we were talking about We actually like I wanted to talk about like this like what we're talking about and like what's the answer if God is dead? And you've killed him and replaced him with nothing What's the answer but we accidentally just ended up talking about virtue and what is a citizen and what is what does it mean? to be a Citizen now versus then versus then then back in the ancients versus the you know, whatever so anyway, so we were talking about How I guess kind of how did we get here? So we did it almost a preliminary like let's let's kind of lay the groundwork What what was it? How did they find meaning then? What what is it? What did it look like to serve to you had your own gods in your own city? You didn't have to really worry you ward a little bit with the others who didn't have your God but you're only concerned with your little polity and Serving Athena or serving Aries or serving Poseidon or serving whoever and so your it was doable in the sort of city-state way that they had it back then and So and then we ended it with me being like, okay, but we didn't cover what to do now because we talked a little bit about Christianity as well and how that was sort of an answer to not sort of like that was an answer to Like meaning crisis in the first century Palestine In a way because it he talks about because this is stuff I learned for my degree I have a Christian Studies degree with the minor in history This is exactly what I remember learning in like, you know history Christian history 101 about the Hellenization of Judaism Which is Christianity basically and oh, yeah, we that's why we talked about then Shapiro's Judeo-Christian thing about the What was it the the burning of Notre Dame? And so we talked a little because he wrote a response to that and I actually made a little video response to that so we talked about That so that's so we've got in some important things, but I didn't get to the meat of like well What do we do now? How should we then live, you know? so Anywho, I am that's where I wanted. I want to start here I do want to start with him eventually when he's done his dissertation, but I want to talk about that here. So Right was seeing in that little piece you showed from his Debate not really debate discussion with Alistair McGrath Alistair basically so you're suggesting a new religion You know and that kind of like it's an answer to Nietzsche Like that's what it is, is it isn't it? Is that am I reading it properly? You should you should have John Vervecki on your channel. They'll probably say yes, and I would What's that I need to like get to know him a bit and be like hey, I'm not a random asking I need to be like hey, you know me a little bit from comments on Twitter He's very he's very open and willing to speak and he does he's been doing a lot of interviews and and what you are asking Is exactly in is exactly what he is trying to address. Okay, so he would be a good guest now now There's sort of three of us. Maybe you should have Jonathan Peugeot on too All of us on or Savilla King her too. I don't know if you know her channel quality experience. She's out there too And some of the other people Mary Cohen and I mean to get there's a whole bunch of us talking about this Okay now So I think John Vervecki does Does a good job laying out the philosophical history and the roots of this Okay, I see things differently in some places partly because of my religious commitments, but He and I are very you know, we're very conversant on this One of the way one of the easy ways to get into it This is a little book by Charles Taylor He generally writes really fat books like like sources sources of the self or a secular age huge books Charles Taylor made the observation that part of part of what happens in modernity is that We are no longer born into a strata. We've born into an external Storied structure now I'm adding my own take to this which I usually do when I quote these people so Purists will come to me and say no that's not exactly what they said. Okay, so I fudge all this stuff but We are born we are born into a storied structure that connects heaven and earth Okay, and and we derive our place in the universe from that structure And these are our ancestors or this is how are we traditionally came into the world? That's how almost all traditional societal societies work There is a there is a story within which everyone lives now this gets at my thesis that That you and I although in this materialist age we tend to fixate sort of on our bodies That I am this body and that's very true but we are really weird bodies because we are we are storied creatures and Illustration I like to use of this is visiting my grandmother once when I was in college or the probably seminar at that point and She she was in her late 80s by this point and I'm in my early 20s and she looks at me and she says, you know when I when I think about myself, I think about myself as being in my 20s and When I look in the mirror here my body is you know in my late 80s and This is a strange thing and it's strange because our bodies age Our bodies change we were children and we grew and all of these and then we grow old But we don't feel that way Well, what is the we that we're thinking about and really in a sense and you'll get this in Benjamin Boyce's Conversation with John Verbeke that we are in a sense this autobiography and That's the me I think about and and I first first thought of this a number of years ago when I was Really wrestling with you know, what does it mean that we have the promise of the resurrection? Because there's all these questions that revolve around it. Well, then it's phrased by Christians in lots of different ways Well what I get to heaven how old will I look? You know, and is it gonna be me in my 20s does it can be in me in my 50s My grandmother had some very strange ideas that with our new bodies our new bodies will be unrecognizable Partly because Jesus was seemed to be hard to recognize So after my grandfather died, she felt quite sad because she imagined she wouldn't recognize him when she got to heaven and I thought Grandma, that's pretty sad Recognize him when he decided to unveil Exactly. So anyway, but but that just it just emphasizes the fact that we are very strange creatures Because this duality between heaven and earth is built right inside of us. Okay, wait feel that can you? Can you explain that a little further? That the heaven and earth thing being inside of us Well, the book of Ecclesiastes has this great line you have put eternity into our hearts and and so when we grow old and we lose strength or or Our situation changes. There's a longing for the past And so there's this aspect to us that is eternal and this aspect to us That is very much in what I call the age of decay and we live between those two poles. Okay, okay so that's what the image I have of myself like it I'd say it's Me now, but when I'm 80 I'll be thinking of me this from this particular video. I'll watch it again and then I'll be like, yeah That's how I see myself now Like it'll be a little different because now that I'm in my mid 50s and can look back at myself on my 20s It's a very interesting dynamic. But yes very much like that. Okay. Well, I'm in my 30s. So, okay But you're like girl it doesn't matter you're a baby I know how that looks. May you grow old It's funny my kids ask like when I because my son is turning six tomorrow and Why have three sons? But my my middle guy is turning six tomorrow and he would say things like mommy when I'm six will I still? like Whatever blank thing, you know, like well, I still like dinosaurs. Well, I still mommy when I'm six I'll be able to do this and It's sort of like a reverse thing of yes, I'm gonna be able to Being worried about Well, am I not gonna be me anymore when I'm six or well, I'll be old enough to do that thing I'm there. I'm nervous to do it now, but I think I'll be able to do it when I'm older and and Yeah, so it's a weird it's kids kind of do that too in a way but yeah, that's an interesting so You're those examples of imagining yourself back or imagining yourself forward those are the eternity along with the What is it? The king dichotomy. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes, and it's and it's in many ways not dissimilar to the ancient you know in Again in the text that I'm preaching on this Sunday in mark 8 Jesus says, you know, what will you gain if you? gain the world Losers but lose your well and now if you pay attention to various translations, you'll see sometimes it's soul Sometimes it's life and it's this it's the psyche Is that the word used in Greek like that's right. That's right. That's okay. And it's it's it's so soul but depending on What age is making that translation they're dealing with this question of what really am I? And and that's the same question that was built into my grandmother's observation. What really am I and and this Crisis between these two elements of ourselves is now on full display in the culture and one of the Manifestations that you can see it at is the whole gender dysphoria Epidemic let's call it. Okay, because and and you know, it's I don't think it's Accidental that it was over these pronouns that Jordan Peterson kind of took off into the political sphere Okay Because it's it's right here at the question of heaven and earth that we are that we are working through these things now this is this is a very this is a very important conversation because we have For the last hundred years been working a been working a line that says we are fundamentally animals That have an illusory experience of eternity Yeah That's I think a very dangerous position to have Yeah, because what it what see and I think it's a very day I've been reading Timothy Snyder's Black Earth and that whenever you read Timothy Snyder's books that scares the heck out of you He writes books about the The middle of the 20th century a lot of the stuff that Jordan Peterson was fascinated by Nazism Communism totalitarian governments and he writes he's a historian though. So whereas Peterson Peterson is kind of pulling all these things together and sort of an integrated picture Timothy Snyder's a historian, but You really begin to realize that in many ways the middle of the 20th century was also in a socio-political way working through these issues because basically what the What communism offered was an answer that well, we are we are economic and classic Animals and the state is our container Okay, not and the Nazis basically said no, we're just animals and all of this second level Eternity stuff that's all from the Jews and we got to get the Jewishness out of the world And I never understood why they hated the Jews In fact, I so I've got part of my ancestry is very Jewish distant relatives were wiped out in the Holocaust Okay, we didn't know but For a whole bunch of reasons, but I always wondered, you know, what's what's what's at the heart of anti-semitism? You can understand some of the things throughout European history but but what's with the Nazis and Timothy Snyder writes quite a bit about that, but he's saying basically we're animals and we have to get rid of the state and And just let nature flourish and that was sort of the Nazi ideal and and so what we're doing right now Is we're wrestling with this question of do we have souls and And so that's the way that's at the heart of the meaning crisis I Think the I think the the struggle between these two aspects. Okay, yes and and So Owen Barfield who's another he was a friend of CS Lewis He comes in here with a very interesting take because he looks at the evolution of consciousness Yeah in this and you begin to note all these interesting things in the Bible in terms of Well, and this gets played on and off throughout Christian history For example when you go to church and the priest elevates the host Mm-hmm is that the body of Christ now? Yeah, ask a Protestant ask a Catholic. Oh very different transubstantiation is a fun subject. Yes. Yeah So so very quickly All of these ideas this question of how do heaven and earth connect? and Actually, if you understand it and though I just use those terms on Twitter today and a lot of people Once you say heaven they hear it in very religious terms They sort of dismiss it and so I try to translate it you know how to mind and body connect his mind is another way of thinking about it and so these issues are all around us right now and and sort of what we've seen happen and Which I think is why Jordan Peterson made such a splash Is he noted he was getting at the connection of mind and body and its conjunction? Peterson says was meaning and That's why one of his 12 rules is and I remember one interview He's asked, you know, which which is the most important of your 12 rules And he said do what is meaningful not what is expedient because for Jordan Peterson Meaning is sort of this internal gyroscope that Within a secular frame because we're cut off from the heavens because we don't believe any of that stuff Then you have to answer the question that you started with what is right? How do you do the right thing? How can you know the good and what Jordan basically says is follow meaning? Do something and if you experience meaning go in that direction now I have issues with that take because actually many of Jordan Peterson's opponents are doing exactly what Jordan Peterson advises them to do That's right, they are meaning and that's right, that's exactly right Yeah, well, well when you look at the end of judges where it's like and they all did what was right in their own eyes, right? and It wasn't very good. No, it wasn't very good. Take a look at the judges folks Right, but then Jordan Jordan says that but then Jordan is also out here playing with the Bible and saying This is kind of our foundation so we we shouldn't lose that and so that's why Conservative religious people listen to him and say oh he could be an ally. Yeah, but but there are a lot of conservative religious people who I know that's most people that I know in the offline world Cuz like oh cuz I like for personally, I don't know. I I am a Christian, but I don't I Don't fall in any denomination I Used to be evangelical, but I'm not I'm a little since that actually since listening to the Jordan Peterson's biblical lectures I've accepted evolution and Such, you know those really yeah, I am gonna have you on my channel. I Know I know people when I tell people they're like wait You were you started a Christian and then you listen to Jordan Peterson's biblical lectures and then went over to science But I just found them as not mutually exclusive That's all right, which isn't done and a lot of and most Jews actually find who wrote it Like they wrote an app like an orthodox too. Okay, but I just think it's hilarious that a lot of Protestants get No, seven days and I'm like, you know, the Jews are fine with the evolution most for the most part and they literally wrote the Bible At least the Old Testament anyway, at least the part that we're talking about in Genesis and and the New Testament too Oh, yeah. Oh, duh. Well, Luke We have a couple Gentiles who wrote a couple books at least Luke Luke was Luca Gentile or was he a or was he a Jew born in the diaspora like Paul? I don't know. Okay. I'm just I just assumed Okay, I was Luke circumcised here's the big question I yeah, I anyway getting into a little bit of a splitting hairs here How many angels can dance in the head of a pin? Just kidding guys. We're getting into the the weeds of theology here So this is just some tangents. I don't usually go there in my in my videos Because I get I don't enjoy I do I really don't enjoy discussing this With atheists that are like the the new atheist, you know, the Sam Harris stock in style Because they're so mean You you might be like, okay, I'm going mean from my word mean is like Factual Like like for me I'm just like I don't want to do this It's not my idea of a good time because they just want to convince me They're throwing facts at me all the time and I'm like, I don't care But I do care I do care that's the thing and I'm like I don't I don't want to make space in my casual Twitter day To go watch this video about why Jesus was a sham and then get back to you I Don't want to do that right now. That's not my idea of a good time in the midst of oh, I have a break from my kids They're having quiet time. I don't want to do that right now. So that's why I get a little bit like Frustrated even though I know I should be open to dialogue, but it doesn't feel like dialogue. It feels like shouting It feels like they're shouting at me through Twitter. I just I'm also a highly agreeable person Some piece some guys, I know they're like just be like no I'm like Anyways, I don't know if I'm gonna keep this part I'm going a little bit off the rails anyway, so okay back to The meeting was a Gentile. No, just kidding Well, we were talking about heaven and earth body and soul. Okay. Oh, I know Okay, yeah that we're losing this partly because we've submissive Okay, so I was talking about Jordan Peterson and how I ended up coming over to everybody I still believe but I'm not that literalist Christian I am fine to look at the Bible as As Inspired but it's written to people for a time and it's not written for us. Actually, it's written for them It was it was not written to us, but it was written for us John Walton says which is kind of a nice way to say Yeah, that's the distinction. So I am NOT. Yeah, there's a certain audience There's also certain genres that are used. There's poems. There's you know Apocalyptic writing there's historical narrative, you know, yeah, like, you know, I'm telling you and you know all these things So there but but I'm telling them I'm telling the people so there are all these different things that we have to consider That that Sort of alter it for me in my understanding You know, so what they mean, I think you even said it in one of your videos like when Jesus says The Son of Man must suffer and die and to the Jews. That's a signal signaling something to Daniel 7 and and to the even at the time to the non-jews to the Gentiles or to whoever it is That are non-jewish peoples They have would have no idea what that meant So same for us we might if you don't know what Son of Man refers to so there's a lot of code It's like not there's a lot of code. I'm not trying to be like the codes in the Bible I'm not one of those the Bible code I'm not trying to be like that. But so to me I have like like People are like, wow, that's a lot of effort for to understand this book and Yes, it is Why can't God make it simple? Do you live in this world? Have you looked at what it looks like the human being? Well, I think it's because you can look at other Religions and be like well, what about reading those texts and put the effort to understand them and I'm like, I had learned Arabic You Read the Quran you could but you absolutely could but I You won't be the one You won't be the one though. My religion is this and I think it's the best one That's why I'm still a Christian like that's the thing that is difficult for me to explain is Why do you believe it because I think it's the best one That's why and if you didn't you would switch I would But that whole platform now what you just illuminated that is part of the meaning crisis, too. Okay Because And and and this is sort of what Tom Holland said in that Dettling Pod interview that I played in a number of videos Where he notes that in some ways when Christianity went out Especially in the colonial period what it did was it brought two religions it brought confessional Christianity That you know was only marginally successful in terms of taking in these lands that the British and the Dutch and the French And the Spanish tried to colonize but then there was this other underneath thing Which is sort of the the platform of pluralism. Let's call it secularism that that relativized all Religions and at this late date now makes us religious consumers. Oh, okay Further what you mean by that? I Didn't see what you're you're you're mentioning so Well the fact that you said well, I think Christianity is right and so I'll stick with it Yeah, what that in a sense does is this embeds you from Christianity? And says my religion is a matter of choice. Okay That's a modern move No, it doesn't it makes you modern, okay and and a It makes you no longer let's say Naive in terms of this is just the way the world is now in a sense you transcend from your embeddedness within these religions and says I Now I imagine myself religion free who can now choose different religions Okay, okay. That's again part of what I talked about with in a traditional society You were born embedded mm-hmm and and there was no outside of The world that you were embedded in now in a sense. We're all sort of floating above it Opting as consumers Okay, because people didn't have a choice because you're born into it. You don't have a choice It is it is whatever you're born into Well, but you see we're getting to radical edges of this because what if I were to come to you today and say Why is it that you identify as female? Okay. Oh, right. We were talking about the gender thing and I totally went off on a tangent. Sorry. Okay We're coming back. So now I think 50 years ago even yeah, if you were to ask someone that they would look at you like you were crazy What That's no or why do you? Why do you identify as human and now I have friends who I live in a very new agey part and we live in Calgary, so it's it could be pretty new agey there, too But you know, I am a spiritual being having a physical experience So I have friends that believe those kinds of things so But but you know even so you've got furries and a bunch of people who say I identify as a very large cat Let's say and yeah, I know you laugh but this is but in a sense when you say when you're looking at the the menu of Religious or worldview options and you say I choose this one There's an eye that exists that didn't used to exist in Many traditional cultures, okay Okay, I can see this right Well, then how did anyone ever convert to Christianity back when? It was new Good question. I don't know what it's like looking at that from the answer because the Apostle Paul did I don't know that see in a sense Right and it because it looks it's There's both an inside and an outside perspective on this Because in a sense once you're within a worldview you can't help but see that world you world worldview from within but yet at the same time we're looking from the outside at others and This is where you get into some of the barfield inside outside stuff. I Don't know are we all in our own worldview though? How can anyone be exactly? True, but we do but we do approach and increasingly so We do approach I dent fundamental identity aspects as menu options for a life that we choose, okay and In a way that past generations Couldn't conceive of right. Okay and And that's very true and it's it's very true of our religious perspective So, how does this relate to the meaning crisis then well, so part of what happens John John Verbecky and Christopher Mastro Pietro have an excellent video on the symptoms of the meaning crisis and and what they talk about in a sense is this the burden of choosing identity and The lack of foundness now, these are my own words I'm putting on it the lack of foundness as a burden, so let's say you were born to parents that said oh And you know, well Andrea, we're just gonna call we're just gonna call them and and So at some point and can choose to put a Y on Anne's name and become Andy or can put in our EA on the end and become Andrea, but we're going to be very careful and never gender Anything in their world until they get to a certain age now, you know, certain people are trying this now Yeah, babies Right and is that to call babies? Yeah, I didn't even know that so So but but here's a question Okay Have what burden have they put on that child? Because when I was growing up, I was a boy. I didn't have to think about what it meant to be a boy Everything that I did was just boy because it was me. I was a boy. I was innocent of that choice now we seem to be imagining we are blessed people blessing people by Launching them into this these into These hallways these Netherlands And we've been doing this with religion for a number of years where people would say well I'm a Christian my wife was Jewish So we're gonna raise them without any religion and when they get old enough they get to choose what that posits is that there's a space of no religion and And what that means is now suddenly there's a burden of I now have to self create Okay What does that say about who and what I really am? I am a cipher I am a blank sheet of paper and At some point I'm going to ask myself What exactly is the eye that is attempting to choose these things? And so there's this there's this real There's this real This real vacuum that we are trying to act out of and What people are beginning to discover? Well, so Well, I am an animal that I can know so I'm an animal but What happens and you'll hear Jordan Peterson for making many others what happens if I? Live so what I can make all these menu choices. So what? I can make all these menu choices. So what you know at some point this animal is going to die any contemplation of The me in my grandmother. Let's say who doesn't age that me is a loser II and so this I which both has the burden of ultimate choice and yet is nothing is Gone in an instant never to be known again not situated in the world and And where verveky takes this verveky and maestro Pietro is in the zombie so the zombie becomes the zombie becomes the the monster of the meaning crisis if you will who is continually trying to devour brains We're on YouTube and we're Twitter and we're just we're just trying to consume the you know, the minds of others But that's horrifying Yeah But that's how we are isn't it? I watched the walking dead like I watched it for a time and then I couldn't anymore because it was Just too much. Oh Okay, I read something about the zombie but I didn't I couldn't finish it because I had to talk with you I was I was reading I didn't I didn't know what it meant. Like I started reading a letter between verveky and someone else on the website letter dot wiki and Talking about the Joker Now we're moving from zombie to Joker replacing the zombie and I didn't know what he meant by zombie though Cuz I I'm not familiar enough with verveky's earlier work So here we are Consuming the brains of Jordan Peterson and John verveky and and and Sam Harris and we're just consuming the brains Our little brain consuming machines But that's right is like people have always been able to like consume the brains of the authors in books Sorry, not sorry not always but for a for a time since books have been available since the printing press The the the meaning crisis is the crisis and emptiness of the brain consumer Because the zombie always eats but is never satisfied So people back then were more satisfied well the assumption well, they were actually embedded in a they were embedded in an entire story of heaven and earth, right and We are now in a little iron box of secularism We can't see the stars to navigate by so maybe we work from a little meaning compass within us, but we're we're cut off from eternity and Everyone tells us eternity is an illusion You are only I mean because the zombie cannot talk the zombie cannot function on On the level of the soul and this is what verveky says Yeah, this is this is the kind of stuff. Yeah, like do a deep dive. Okay. Okay. The problem is there's a lot there I know Okay, here's the thing Actually, no, there's a couple things and with I'll just say with for vacay watch the Watch the one about zombies with him and Mastro Pietro and the one on symptoms of the meaning crisis and then watch other interviews Because he he lands the plane quite a bit more quickly in the other interviews if you do his whole course awakening from the meaning crisis There's 50 hours. So just be warned Or and Andrew Sweeney has been blogging on medium summaries of verveky That's another good way to get at what verveky is doing, okay, so The thing is The in Christianity though the the the material Like the body is is emphasized though Yes, it is right. It doesn't go away. We are raised from the dead yeah, and that's the whole like thing against Gnosticism and that's right and dosaism and all those other Little sects or Heresies, I guess depending on how you view them Right for I guess those of you who don't know what Gnosticism is it's the idea that Jesus just came in spirit not physically and the sort of bodily resurrection when when Yeah, I can call it if he had a body right but no be out of the idea of like put your Like put your hands in my in like touch the scars touch my side. I'm a physical being, you know Watch me eat a fish. Yeah, so those are That is very emphasized in in the Christian worldview that we are bodily beings With with depth and soul and spirit. Yes. We're I mean, I remember my mom we're a living nephesh tripartite beings We are that we are the stuff of earth and the breath of God right Genesis 2, right? So so it's a balance I suppose It's both and okay because balance assumes it's both Integration integrated. Okay, so it's an integrated system and the idea of pulling away one like the Gnostics wanted to just have spiritual but now our scientism friends Want it to just be? Physical and To me it just seems Even coming from a pragmatic like well what works What works the best and this is what I've sort of observed all of the different people's who survived atrocious times, you know in The gulag or people who were in Well, not necessarily like I know Victor Frankel was he religious he wasn't religious was he Not really not that I could tell from I've only read one of his books man search for me Yeah, which is an excellent book. Yes. Yeah, so I mean he always said the best of them didn't make it anyway, but um, but but well there's not room for there's not much room for Altruism in a concentration camp, but at least in the gulag Accounts that I've read I've read Solos Nitzen and I mean a part of it I haven't so big but I've read I've read and then someone else actually came up like did a Twitter thread of a guy who was similar to Solos Nitzen but his stuff was like buried since the 70s and it was I can't I wish I would have written this guy's name down but similar sort of Testimonial of what the people who always ended up making it through or at least not having not not Bowing down and not having their spears broken even if they literally died Those who made it through were the ones who were had had faith so they said like, you know, the orthodox like Priests or none. No, that's not They're orthodox so they don't have those but the the people who were really They do have priests. Oh, I'm sorry. I'm thinking like Protestant Catholic, but so they do have priests. Yeah, they do. Yeah, I studied this I should know anyway It's been a while. It's been like ten years but but yeah, so those who were Really had a deep faith were the ones who would stand up like I remember reading this one woman About this woman who they took in the beginning of the Gulag archipelago and she says to the the guards there. She wasn't even in the In the Gulag yet She was just being in the holding facility and she's like there's she looked at them and she's like there's nothing you can do to me You can kill me but I don't care because I know where I'm going and And you don't even know what to do with me because you are looking at him and you're afraid that he's gonna report you for not doing the proper things to break me and then he's afraid that you will do the same to him and I Win basically She's like 80 and they let her go because they did not know what to do with her, right? Right, I just like it blew my mind Because she also was super old I mean, honestly if you're like I've lived my life like I you know But she also had this sort of she had something they didn't understand something that was beyond and Like she had her meaning I guess and It just it seems to work Do you know what I mean? Yes in the storm, you don't know if you have if you have a calm A calm sea you're not really a sailor until you Weather a storm. That's what it seems like to me So and again, there are a lot of people who could break though Like who are like, oh well the like you could come up with well these Christians they broke like they they you know denied their You know, you can come up with as look at Peter Well, yeah, I mean and that's why it's nice that we have grace under the withering assault of a slave girl warming herself by the fire Denies him not once not twice three times three times thrice. You're right. And that's why it is nice that We're not damned to hell if we do deny but the ones but there are there's just these stories that have really stood out of the people who Can be stronger than a totalitarian threat of death are the ones who have something to hold on to that is bigger than our Physical world and that's the thing that I'm like, I don't and I mean some Buddhist monks might have this I don't know. I don't want to act like I have read all the stories of people who can Go into another plane, you know what I mean? So I might be wrong in this but it seems like those who have a grasp on that eternity bit In the hard times and I mean hard times like not North American Western Europe hard times Maybe maybe We're having a recession. Yeah, I know I know so maybe Western Europe in you know, World War two and and Eastern Europe and during and and the and all of Russia during the Cold War and what not during the Soviet Union Those are the hard times. I'm thinking of it seems so that's what I mean by the pragmatic It seems to work better than oh, yeah We just rely on ourselves and our own sort of moral compass from within That doesn't seem to weather the hardest times It seems like you need something outside of yourself to be striving for and that's where they could say Okay So the good as opposed to the God and so that's where Peterson doesn't go far enough for some and But but then the scientists people the scientism folks are like, yeah Peterson's wrong anyway Well, you're exactly You're hitting exit so so Richard Dawkins and Joe and Joe Rogan sit there and say I don't know why Everyone in the world in the ancient world came out religious and it's like, you know how bad the world was I mean, it's it's a breeding ground for religion for exactly the dynamic. You just put your finger on and Why why is the greatest cause of death due to meaning crisis? Suicide and it's happening in the affluent West Well, it's for all of those reasons you just described Okay, what about and I'm gonna do sort of devil's advocate here because I know I Know that's gonna happen with my secular audience. I don't actually even know I don't know what I know on Twitter I have a very very atheist space because I'm an intellectual Twitter, which is mostly atheist Twitter so Okay We've come to a new age though, we don't have to live in the past anymore Paul We know better now we know better So what we have facts and we have science and we have seen where religious fanaticism aka the Crusades aka I don't know Now is China like the religion was the state they won't use that one. Well, no, but they say the religion I've heard them say it's the religion became the state same with Russia or Soviet Union the religion became the state so They never they never they never look more deeply at the Nazis Because it would terrify them if they did well because the Nazis were technically Lutheran You should you got to read Timothy Snyder, okay because that because basically so Hitler Trot Hitler's first attempt at taking over Germany landed him in jail And he learned from that and what he learned was you're gonna have to be really sneaky about the religion thing You're gonna have to come at it from below Okay, and you're gonna have to supplant it and corrupt it. You can't directly deny it because Germany was a very Christian country Yeah My approach to people that come at that is simply patience because I'll tell you something live in this world long enough Tragedy will find you And Peterson says that too, but like what about people like Dawkins? He's lived in this world for a while. He's still contends That there is this this mind virus thing Yeah, well, it's not gonna go away But it's also not going to get the kind of traction they imagine it will Sorry Jersey we dropped each other all the time if two people aren't talking at once I know I know Western Canadians my brother-in-law is one don't don't pull that Canadians Okay, okay, but what about what about the idea of We're just looking at Because what bread is saying I'm trying to think I Do want to come back to like okay. What kind of religion is Brett want? That's what I'm a little bit fuzzy on He doesn't want a religion. He wants a something So I do want to come back to call it a religion Something yeah, but a thing like a thing that God is dead and we've killed him and we replaced it with nothing Well, what's the thing we replace it with I do want to go there But what about the what about if we we look at people who say well What a well we have science we don't have to be superstitious anymore, that's kind of what Brett was saying We had we can keep the wisdom But we don't need the superstition anymore We don't need we can think I mean and even if he agreed with Peterson But he doesn't But like the nice because even Peterson doesn't go far enough with for some he has the idea of oh we have the arch Archetype of Christ take up your cross. That's what suffering is. That's sorry. That's what life is It's suffering. So if we take up our cross willingly and walk towards our deaths with their heads held high Meaningful life boom done Meaningful life boom done That's it and then we see it's it's but the verveky is actually see verveky and Brett are sort of Verveky has thought through quite a bit more What Brett is sort of wishing for? Okay, because verveky says we need practices. We need community We need all of these we need all of these things that religion used to provide Because without those things we are suffering Brett hasn't got that far gotten that far in his thought Okay, Brett just imagines that This is why again I say the IDW is more political Brett just imagines that well There are political solutions to these issues and I would argue and I think verveky is right that In the 20th century We saw a variety of political solutions or attempts at political solutions to the meaning crisis One of them was communism. One of them was was fascism and what happens is that these? Ideologies then sort of take the place but Peterson's critique I think is important Peterson notes that these ideologies are sort of crippled religions and what I think Peterson means by that is that What they don't afford is the full universe the full story in which we can inhabit and the reason we know that people are hungry for these stories is Because we watch them try and live in the Harry Potter world try and live in the Star Wars world Try and live and in the Avengers world Yeah in the Avengers world in the Marvel Cinematic Universe And there's this great there's this great video that was out a number of years ago on college humor that basically made the observation Star Wars nerds and religious people are doing the same thing and that that video was exactly right Because to be religious means here we go to the house of the Lord here We offer our gifts to him here. We hear the word of God here We live our life within the kingdom of God that is what religion does and so in a sense what John Reveke is looking for is well, let's regain the functionality within a secular context but and John and I are quite open about this I'm dubious about his project because I As I say as I'm saying increasingly now and hopefully that the story verse is our machine code That because we are Because again this this part that doesn't decay is an autobiography That's the code that links in our little story to our family story and our tribal story and our national story and our religious Story, that's how we navigate this world because story I just caught a great clip today of a philosopher University of Texas he's teaching on Plato. He makes the observation every time Plato doesn't quite know What's can't quite explain something he tells a story and That's how we are because stories are machine code Yeah, and okay and the problem that we have is the story we are getting from secularity says Story itself is a loser e it might be fun But it isn't real. Okay. See and I have spoken with some Like a friend of mine who really like oh So my friend Jay Shapiro, I've had him on a couple times that he wants to do like a an old-fashioned sort of religion versus atheism sort of debate with me and I'm like I Just am not you're not that kind of person ready. Well, it would be it wouldn't be a high agreeableness I It would be a discussion though again, he's actually pretty nice with me to be have Esther do it she'd love it Yeah, I'm so not I it wouldn't it wouldn't be a debate it would be a discussion to be honest But I told him like man, I'm not ready. But like I I'm I'm starting to open up a bit more Because again, I don't enjoy that What I get after if after this video I'm like, I don't know What kind of comments I'll be having to deal with not because I'm afraid because I don't enjoy putting time to talk with brick walls It's sending to the discord server. There's plenty of people who want to talk to him there There's plenty of people on their side there. So, okay So, okay And in fact my meetup groups have been Small groups Basically about the meaning crisis, okay, because we have atheists and Christians and we're not having Apologetic debates like that. No, we're talking about this crisis that we have in common because it affects Christians, too Okay, and he is like, oh, I just think it's important to get to started talking about these things yeah, and I agree with that and so I again I I need to I At some points I'll say yes, but I just want to start a meetup in in Calgary I can I've got people that'll help you I could I don't know. I don't know if I have the time I put most of the time you've got little kids my kids and then this is my that's my time goes But anywho, it's it's something to do He he oh, sorry. I brought him up because in the past he has suggested About the whole story thing. He's like, yes, I agree story is important Let's get better stories. He just thinks that there's better stories than the Christ story And I'm like, okay. I mean Humor him though. I'm like, okay. Well, I don't know what stories he means and I'm like, well, I mean Tolkien did a pretty good job in writing another story But it and I'm I'm like well, but England didn't adopt it as their story though like it's and he didn't even want it to be the the Replacement to religion but what I mean is I'm like, you know, what's and I and I gotta ask them This will be what I ask him on next next time. I have him on What stories? What? What why in all these stories? I mean look at look at Luke Skywalker Look at Lord of the Rings. Look at Harry Potter. You can find Christ in all those stories. I Don't know wouldn't people Buddhists be like, yeah, you can find Buddha and all of them too. I don't know all you can these are there these are archetypal stories and The hero the the archer arch well, we we see Christ as the archero but The dying and rising God CS Lewis worked through this stuff. So the inklings again, these are guys that fought in World War one and they came out of World War one and You know the world was ripped apart inside and out and so Lewis and Tolkien That the inklings were an attempt to sit down and write the share with each other the kinds of stories They wanted to hear nobody else was writing them. So they started writing them themselves. That's where we get Lord of the Rings that's how we got Narnia because They they knew they needed but it's it's that one question that one student asked Jordan Peterson Why can't we just write the archetypal story and it's because the story has to that's where you get into Aristotle the story has to take on the The stuff of our world for us to be able to connect with it. So you can't just come up with Like there's something What am I saying there is there's something that has to be Inspired It has to be a sort of inspiration That isn't common Well, it also has to be battle-tested Right, which is why certain stories won't go away, but that's the thing It's not a Christianity does not stand up alone Look at Islam and I find that very problematic The teachings of Islam Because I mean I've studied it. I'm reading Yasmeen Muhammad's book unveiled It's and I already knew lots of it, but this is like I look inside what a fundamentalist Muslim household and I'm like, it's I Mean and she's like it it isn't Like to me she's like it's all lies, you know, it's what she's she's coming from that perspective But for all religion, you know So she's like she's an ex-Muslim and she she doesn't have any any religion now and I can understand to an extent why because That religion really really did a number on her and But but it still persists though Yeah, so I mean you could ask a billion Muslims and they're like, yeah. Yeah ours is the right one Yeah, there's also a billion Christians you could ask and they'll be like, yeah. No ours is the right one So that's I kind of If I kind of People look at that as if that's a defeater, but that's just a human thing Ask a billion people ask ask people Democrats or Republicans. Well, they'll pick one in Canada You know, you've got more parties to choose from you know, and people just choose different things that people are like Well, that means nothing is true. Well, no, that's not right. It means that but the standing the test of time thing Yeah, it's a very good thing Yeah, it's a big deal. Well, well, but I mean Mohammed's story has not stood it as long It's about what 400 450 years older or younger than Christianity. It's still very Present. Oh, yeah. Yeah these with these we're very instant people in our culture These things take long times to work through but where are the temples to Marduk? where are the temples to Augustus and So in many ways that which endures is that which endures so we'll see in The battle between Islam and Christianity, I guess we'll see is what you're saying. Yeah. Yeah, it's a 1300 year old battle Islam is not going away by any means because it will fill something though. It fulfills a need Absolutely, it gives meaning So what do we do with that though, we're like, oh no, but do you like Jesus is the way and He stood the test of time and then people bring up. Okay. Well, what about Islam though? You be a Christian? You mean like that's what you do that so that I mean that sort of That's always the answer. I mean, we live it out and see yes Live it out and see yes Well, just do it just be a Christian be a Christian to your children be a Christian to your husband Be a Christian to your neighbor be a Christian in your city So what you know be the Verses where Jesus says I came to not bring peace but a sword You're gonna have to work all that you're gonna have to work all that stuff through and what your videos are doing is you're Working all that stuff through it's do the work you're already doing Paul there's so many like There's not easy answers man, no, they're not no This gets into the weeds though. People like pick out verses to throw And I to me I think a lot is metaphorical and not literal again who what who's the audience that's being spoken to? but Okay, so just live it and that is that's what I've seen not just it's hard No, but that's what I mean like if I'm looking at it from Well, what what is the best way to be and from and again? I'm doing that. I'm doing that modern thing you described earlier about well for me From my testimony of what my life has shown if I Live as if we're all Embodying the divine logos and we're all starting at the same space No one better than the same. Wait, we're not true. No. No what no democracy is a new thing You were born with advantages. Okay. No. No, I mean I mean like literally like no one's we're all born in a Fallen world see now. Oh, yeah But I'm better than so and so or so and so and this is this is part of the trick here because before I said Okay, you're in a sense dislocated. It's you choosing from a menu and and so there's a dislocation There's an alienation there, but the some of the democratic stuff that you've just said before there's your foundness That's what you're born into that's in a sense the default the default Perspective that you're working from and that is itself a perspective Okay, and and it's helpful to see that Because in a weird way this meaning crisis is itself a thing, too Wait, it's very meta. I don't want to go all Jordan Hall on you. Okay. What do you mean by a thing, too? There's there's in a sense the myth of the outside that we have in our culture I can step out of the religion in which I was raised in and Choose another what's interesting is that? former evangelicals who become atheists They still act like evangelicals. They're just pushing other things. I find ex People who leave Christianity and become atheists To be the most Intense in their beliefs of a funny. I do I do see that Yeah, they're so they're vehemently Yeah So so we can't we can't escape our formation even though in this culture We have such angst and alienation from it Okay, but wait, what if I but is that not? Is that not a sort of? Christian way of thinking oh, it's deeply Christian. Oh, well, no, but I mean to think that I am I like We're we're starting like I'm not better than others Is that not? That is that's very that's very Augustine of you. It's all what? Oh, okay. It's very Augustine of you Oh, it's very very total depravity ish We're all sinners. Oh, I hate We're all sinners. Oh, I hate don't No, I don't want to say I hate it, but I don't i'm not a fan of total depravity No But I do think we're all like I don't think i'm better than anyone else because we're all We're all lost You're a good democratic person That's good, but you don't think that other people from other societies who are also Christians? Would have that same perspective Oh, that's deeply Christian That's that's what I mean. Okay, because when I I've tweeted this out about how i'm like I think that I don't think i'm better than anyone else. I think that we're all image bearers It's romans one two and three. That's where it comes from and and i've had I got I got I got like a lot of not a lot but a bit of pushback. Like you don't think you're better than mass murderers You don't think you're better than hitler or stalin And it's very foreign to some to hear that I've sort of grown up believing that and it's kind of um it's it's a sort of it makes for me it's uh It's sort of freeing to not go around like making a hierarchy of where you fit But I know we can't escape hierarchies though But uh, but we're that's what actually a question I i've had that's not really it is maybe to do with the first shall be Last and the last shall be first principle It's literally our material Even evolutionary world of hierarchies turned on its head And what is that? How do what do we do with that? I'm not free of hierarchical thinking And you shouldn't be but you can't help but but me dealing with hierarchies thinking that I am not better than anyone Else right it sort of with three you are not better than anyone else with regard to what? My god is not god is no that that you Have within yourself the potential of being a nazi prison guard or a communist gulag officer, right? Right you have and again, this is where peterson comes along and he's very augustinian in his anthropology Because he says when you go visit auschwitz you should Understand that there but he doesn't say it this way because There but for the grace of god go I deeply christian what happens in christianity Is if you have eyes to see how jesus talks about status and hierarchies He's playing with these things all the time because the roman empire was very stratified Yeah, and so you could find this the gospel of luke the gospel of luke is full of this and when I um I don't often reach back on these shelves, but uh someone recently was asking it was my favorite Um commentary on the gospel of luke by joel green really Turned my that's a big commentary a lot of that. Yeah, that's a big commentary When I was going through the book of first peter I began to notice how jesus Takes these things and is always working these ideas of status Okay, you see it in philippians too, right jesus, although he's very nature god, which is you can't get any higher in the hierarchy Did not consider equality with god as something to be exploited But became a slave and suffered the death of a slave And because he did that he is elevated to the highest place And and you see this in christianity all the time Because jesus the the disciples are elbowing each other for supremacy first place in the kingdom And what does jesus say to them? That's the first shall be last verse i'm pretty sure right he says well He looks around and there's a little boy in the room in this rented room Oh unless you have the faith of a child is that it? Okay? Well, not the faith but he says unless you're like that child like that child Why is that child in that room that child's in that room taking dishes that child is acting as an unpaid Servant, okay, probably in the rented room and jesus is and then um john 13 When jesus comes in and he's about to show them the extent of his love He strips down wraps a towel around himself and is going to wash their feet and how does he respond? No No master you can't be doing this for us That's right. And peter said That's right. And jesus says unless you let me wash your feet You can have no part of me and peter's like then wash all of me and jesus says feet's enough Oh that jesus But if you pay attention to these things they're throughout the gospels and throughout the new testament that jesus both brings An equality among you there shall be no masters. That's how it works in the gentiles, but you're all brothers and sisters So he brings a certain equality among them, but there's still very much a hierarchy So there's actually both and jesus is is modulating both of them Throughout the gospels and that gets embedded into christianity and that's why when you say in the increasingly post-christian world I'm no better than the people who have done these atrocities See already out there people are like, oh no. Oh no, because they've already Modified the system to have good guys and bad guys, right? And well, we're part of the good guys And then there's those other people over there And well now how do you know you wouldn't if you were there? how do you know and what happens, you know renee garrard is really good at this because Here's the thing when you list yourself and soljana did the same thing when you list yourself among the good people Well, you've just in a sense Elevated yourself forgiven yourself turned a blind eye to everything and are now pointing the finger at the other and who in scripture is the accuser That's the kingdom of satan. It's the accusation and so when they come to arrest jesus peter takes a sword chops off the The ear of the high pre-servant Jesus has put that away puts the ear back on Take me And jesus says anybody's blood is going to be shed. Let it be mine Okay, well, what do you think about that verse? I can't remember where it was but you know the one about the jesus saying I don't I haven't come to bring peace but a sword Yeah, he's bringing division and he does he brings terrible division in the world. Okay, that's what I said That it's more like a sort of projecting into the future But jesus and pieces pieces Shouldn't it be love and peace and and and uh sort of what it like bringing together rather than Tearing apart Sure, but people don't want People don't want things brought together You know now in the u.s. Depending on which side you're on the blue or the red states The blue or the red states do you want peace? No, what do you want? We can't we can't peace is irresponsible No justice, no peace, right? That's the cry Right. Okay. And so no we want love but you they don't deserve love Okay, so it's it's him saying what it's going to be not what There are sometimes two different things i've seen in the bible. It talks about um Give to the poor And then oh the poor will always be among you. Well, which is it? Which is it? Oh, it's both but it's but it's sometimes it's speaking to what you should do and sometimes it's speaking to what Will be happening and what because he knows because we know it's like human nature Will always take over but it doesn't mean you don't strive To eradicate poverty, but it will always be there. So is that sort of the dichotomy of what's like? Well He is like, you know, blessed are the peacemakers But also I will bring division Because that's what's going to happen. Well, we'll think about it this way There was a culture war going on in the first century Okay, you have the romans and the jews who are collaborating with the romans and all these little different factions that had a menu of option We're dealing with this crisis kill the romans Go hide in the desert. Yeah fight a subtle culture war about religion About religious observance and and subtle little culture culture cues These people hated each other They could all agree that the world would be better without jesus Okay, so did bring did did jesus bring unity? Yeah, he did how? They all agreed he should die Okay, so did he bring conflict? Yeah, he did They all the conflict was pointed at him right That jesus Well, I mean here's the thing so people look at jesus today. Oh jesus is so loving and tolerant and nice it's like first of all, you haven't read the gospels right because That second of all Whether or not you believe in the resurrection um To the degree that you accept any history about jesus The one thing in history that is the most was the most foundational historic fact is that they killed him Why would they kill him? Well, they killed other messiahs too Well, what kind of a messiah was he he was the wrong kind of a messiah? Yeah, you know because there were lots of others who said hey, this is what we're gonna do We're gonna get a group of people together. We're gonna get a big twitter following a big youtube following We're gonna get all these people we're gonna infiltrate them with our ideas and then we're gonna have them vote Or we're gonna arm them then we're gonna take this city and that city and that city and we're gonna win the world Jesus didn't do that right and that could very well be why judas jumped ship Because everyone's kind of waiting for jesus to do this to do the thing to do the thing to do the alexander the great Thing to do the augustus thing to do the obama or the trump thing to do that kind of thing the gangus khan thing the gangus khan thing And jesus says no i'm going to do the craziest thing you can imagine in this game I'm going to lose and i'm not just going to lose literally i'm going to lose bigly And when I do this i'm going to win And people say well, I don't believe in the resurrection then you have no idea why he won and keeps winning Well, that's the thing is he does keep winning in the hearts and minds of so many people he He's not going away. Even if you don't believe even if and this brings us over to brett even if I am Talking about all of these. Okay, let's just say like even if I didn't believe Even if I was coming at it from a secular standpoint You could still be like, okay, so he is winning though in so in so many circles Well, how do we how how do we supplant that because you can't just take it away. You can't just be like no science Because that doesn't replace it. It's not it isn't the proper system. It's not a community It's not a you go to to science church And you connect with other fellow science people and then you go home and then you have potlucks with those science science people Like there's not a community Every day life the way that say church is I it seems like brett And maybe I guess burbaki as well from what you've described. I'm not as familiar with his Work, but that they want to come up with us something that I don't know if it's not necessarily scientific But a something to bring people together to replace not just christianity. Yeah in the west it's christianity Sure, but they very much want it scientific. Well, oh they do want it but but oh, yeah, they want it scientific That's the thing that they needed to have They needed to have that Okay, they believe in that even though they don't say it's belief they say it's facts, but they do believe in it See, that's where they get they get upset though because i've seen people jordan peterson do this Well, you know, I know that you're arguing against me But the fact that you're sitting here using your logos to talk to me Is is actually me winning? And I would be really annoyed too If someone said that to me like well, you know, you're you're billions of years of evolution Even though I do believe in evolution, but whatever Is actually the thing that is culminated in your mind and your logic and your beliefs and whatever That reptile brain that is whatever like Corresponding with the frontal lobe. That's what's making you talk about believing in jesus like you know, I I don't really love that as a win as like I win because of the depth of the things I believe that's inside of you speaking out, but It I just It doesn't I don't know how it can work like if I am say Talking with people who aren't in the religious sphere Who are saying? Oh, yeah, there's a meaning crisis We need to do something about it. Well, what do we do and like you are saying? Yeah, there is and Jesus is the answer to church Right, I know but I say find a church old answer is the thing. That's the old answer It is it is like I I don't even say it I usually just ask the questions because I want to hear people's perspectives and I am like i'm legitimately curious as well as like, okay. Well, what's the answer to this meaning crisis then? Because and it always stays It doesn't I don't get a real answer I've never gotten a real answer Is it something that you can just put out there? Well, I Well, other than or is it something that you have to live again? Another thing from verveky is this four p's there's four ways of knowing there's propositional. Yeah, there's Perspectival there's participatory and there's procedural and so and If we're talking like this Yeah, the the propositional will be forefronted because just of the medium We're using okay, and that's an issue but you don't live in that Medium that medium is an aspect that logos is an aspect of our of our life But it's beginning of the gospel of john the logos becomes flesh and tabernacles among us So it's participatory. It's procedural. It's Perspectival and so the answer to the meaning crisis is going to be is going to have It's going to have all four of those to it and it will always in this age be insufficient Because the kingdom has not yet come But it will always be an estuary of the now and the not yet And yeah, these are all very old answers Well, and it it seems like they want to take They I don't know. I don't I i've not been okay. I don't know How To come up with something how anything else can work other than Faith in something remember remember what I told you before what you should you the answer to the meaning crisis for you Is be a christian But people figure that out but you're gonna have to figure that out. Okay, I could say that I could be like hey guys, I found the answer to the meaning crisis. It's been with me all along be a christian But everyone everyone on my twitter most would be like no, that's Superstitious and silly now. Let me let me make an observation to you Let's think of who would be the greatest preacher in the history of the world I don't know Maybe come on sunday school answer. Okay, jesus. Yeah, there you go Read the gospels, okay jesus is the preacher in fact jesus preaching is so good and tom holland makes this point that four writers writing about him Managed to write things that have fascinated Not only that culture at that time, but every other many other cultures since then over the history of the world Horizontally among cultures too. Jesus is that good of a preacher, okay, but okay, but jesus preached to people and guess what? What? They often didn't get it. They didn't get it at all. He annoyed them. He fascinated them He was such he was so annoying. In fact, they killed him He was that good of a preacher So you think you're going to go to twitter and have some words to say that everyone's just going to follow over and say I don't think that no, that's the thing Right, and that's and so when you say well, what's the answer? Well, live the christian life. Well, it's working. It's working out your own salvation Right. That's Yeah, and that's right and being a witness You know I love the beginning of the book of acts the disciples come to jesus after the crucifixion. Oh after the resurrection And then he's with them for 40 days and they say now will you restore the kingdom to israel? And if I were jesus I go like this because they don't understand anything and he completely side steps the question And actually answers the question and says you will receive power when the holy spirit comes upon you and you will be my witnesses And if he had said and by the way if you had never met me and lived nice little lives in galilee You probably would have been okay. Maybe gotten killed in 70 ad But some of you have died of old age before then now instead by following me you're going to go all over the world There's going to be lots of nasty little fights on all the churches that you've found will probably squabble and have lots of different Sin problems and most of you are going to die Unnaturally young at the hands of others who hate you just like they hated me There's the package. Is that what you'd like and they say no, but where else will we find the words of life? There's the christian life. Sometimes I say that to people say why would anyone want to become a christian? I'd say I don't know. It's john 6 Jesus says eat my body drink my blood everybody leaves them and he looks at the disciples says what about you? You're going to leave me. No, where else will we find the words of life? There's the christian life And Okay But I just I So many I just The the echoes of and again like it's not bad. It's just the sort of modern day But we've moved past that Oh, yeah, we're enlightened now. We know science. That's that's right. So that's why That's why we have this meaning crisis congratulations we've graduated to the meaning crisis I know I know and it's people's it's it's people saying but we have science It's we're we're post enlightenment now We know better we have science and it brought us the internal combustion engine. And so now we're killing the world and in fact we will we Well, we know how to stop Climate change at least if you buy the whole package Which I know many of my audience doesn't so I hear it in the comment section, but okay But notice now we're impotent. So now brett weinstein is like we've got to do something or we're not getting out of this And it's like yes. Yeah. Yeah, it's always been that way brett What do you propose? Yeah, there's always there's always something it's just more global now It seems like and the and the universal answer throughout human history has been Totalitarian grab power threaten people with the sword. That's how we'll fix it Yeah, that's right. And that's why I think the idea of flipping hierarchies on their heads you are you win by Losing you you become a king by being a servant How are you gonna beat a guy that every time you kill him He raises from the dead and he doesn't haunt you like a ghost But he loves you like a brother. How are you gonna beat a guy like that? That's why jesus keeps winning Yeah, he he's not going away like even if people No, and I do because I don't I I know I can't escape my my worldview But I do try to see the minds and i'm probably not doing the best job I try to see the minds of well because I have my own doing well. I can see it. You're doing well Well I have my own doubts because since since since subscribing to evolution And seeing this sort of well if I say believing in evolution, I always get crap for saying, you know Esther is gonna come at you. She's gonna so come at you. But anyway, I know she already has she already wrote me She wrote me back when I mentioned it in the first place She sent me a bunch of stuff. But even if it's not the literal Darwinian there's I do think that there are processes over millions of whatever anyway I don't agree that the world is 6 000 years old at the very least but I do think that there are Mix of I do believe in ex nihilo out of nothing creation sort of intelligent design style Coming out of whatever and all the people actually In this I will give them this i've had a number of scientist friends who are like Give me intelligent design any day over the woke crisis So I find that quite funny actually, um but anyway, I Ever since sort of subscribing to that and understanding that because peterson lays that lays out the biological With the symbolic in genesis so well so there's a lot of overlap between What happens in genesis that's symbolic of actually what really made us Come into consciousness in our evolutionary history And so it wasn't it wasn't someone like dawkins who made me be like, oh evolution. Okay He says I have a mind virus. Why would I believe him? It was peterson? who Showed me the I guess compatibility So does that make sense? Anyways, I'm starting to go into my story makes perfect sense So so I will I will explain this more if you ever have me on So I don't want to go into that sort of waking up but ever since then i've i've had a Bit I wouldn't I guess you could kind of call it a bit of a Meaning crisis myself I'm sure you have sort of well, I wrote you do you remember? I wrote you I wrote did you yes, I wrote you a while ago I was like I get letters from people a lot. I can't always remember. I you probably do so I I wrote you because I saw you on ben's benjamin voice's channel Okay, and you were like smart and stuff and And you just seemed like not the typical protestant preacher man Hi, you seemed like you would be able to think outside the box And so I wrote you questioning about a box here somewhere Here I have A box I wrote you all right. Let's see if I can think within the box. There we go Oh Literality Okay, the literal internet. So I know I had awareness from now on on my videos No, but now you're in a box. So that's I feel like we're kind of like iron box of secularism. I have a new prop Can you think of it in a box can you think of it Okay, so I actually wrote you um wondering about The resurrection I think and the bodily resurrection and I'm like how I hope I wrote back you did yes You did And you you worded it as Well, you know what we live out our stories Our our stories are our our big stories are mimicked in our life stories and Our our bit so you said it would it does it not make sense that If we are the bodily representation of our big stories of our myths That the word would not have been made flesh as well And and that is me that is my interpretation of what you wrote me It wasn't actually that but that would and it's like for me. I'm like, oh Of course, of course This The story was made flesh for us to understand it To relate to it and to see it in action because we live our out our own bodily stories Of course the story maker had to come so if so, that's where I I don't know even if people are like Whatever andrea that is not clicking for me To my uh secular audience fine, but but one thing we can't deny Is the importance of stories to human beings I mean, I don't know there might be something or other I don't think that there are other Like like animals or man even in in our primate world. They don't have stories They don't learn the way that we learn I I think that there's something that about stories that and and remembering our stories Um that makes us human and and Remember our stories don't decay Well, they get they they rebuild on them. Yes, they do. Yes, we do look at the old and the new testament And one thing that peterson really points out the sort of hypertext of the bible The fact that it isn't a giant mishmash and how does it make sense with all these different authors? You know people saying well here's why is the bible true? Look at all the different people who wrote it and and how it's kind of somewhat contradictory and others and one says it's fulfilling the other and you don't have to keep it but but it's fulfilled and Blah blah, but it's all one story, which is kind of amazing to me even if you just look at it as like an interesting text it is very interesting that it it makes sense and anyway, I just I do think that one thing even if you don't believe In the things you and I are talking about we can almost all agree and that's sort of the starting point Of the meaning crisis is agreeing that Stories are foundational. I think you know, you've got to find what you you all agree on So that's for me and especially from this conversation. I think okay, let's agree to to how important stories are and um How we need stories and that's actually what I want to talk with this one, um, like the ancient Aristotle specialist guy Stephen Klaus I said I ended actually I think or I can't remember if I recorded it or if it was after I stopped recording and I asked him i'm like But we've always believed our stories Stephen Historically, we've always believed them to be true Aristotle didn't believe those stories Plato didn't believe the stories, but he still put them in his His writings and and he said well Aristotle thought that the people needed them Because they believed them. So i'm like, well, don't we need to believe them? And he's like, well, that's the next episode and then we stopped And I didn't get to go further So that's what my question is like how do we need to believe our stories? How can these secular? Scientists scientism people how can they come up with stories? We have to believe they're true Right, they have stories they believe are true, but those stories They're not totally helpful What they're not very inspired They're really boring. You mean like and they're and they're not battle tested and they keep changing And that's why they don't win because science is always fluid Well, it's yeah, and it's science is a Particular way of looking at the world that is very powerful and very wonderful in many ways But call it objective They would call it object an objective the only objective way of seeing the world and I call that the monarchical vision But we don't possess that power Okay, we can't look we can't look at the universe from nowhere We can we always look at it from a place And as you know, and so peterson used this uses the illustration of walking through a cornfield Well, here's the thing about a cornfield you can stand outside of a cornfield and talk forever about The this the species of corn that was given to us by monsanto or whatever But that doesn't tell you anything about how to walk through it And and that's where action is really important The is ought sort of yeah. Yeah, and and vervekis, you know the vervekis the thing he brings into this thing Is really this relevance realization, which is this really cool idea? Um, but I don't have time to go into that now But you know, but you know, so yeah, so john's I I really like john's work. It's been really helpful to me Well, I I would like to talk to him because I do need to hear I don't know how they're gonna do it without A faith-based something even a religious framework. I don't they do have a religious framework though They don't call it that How do you yeah and that that would be very interesting to ask john that question Maybe next time I talk to him i'll ask him because it's it's just so So what is religion and the word religion is so terribly fraught and there are actually The problem with the word religion is that there are too many competing definitions of it that are all valid But within the context of a conversation, what are we actually trying to talk about? So that's that's what's that's the challenge Does my does my like Confusion about it makes sense like like about like well, we have to build They have to believe in the stories Okay, what okay i'm gonna end it. I have to ask I suppose I need to ask them this Someone who believes in it They wouldn't say believe but they believe it. What what are their stories? What what are they? Well, what are the stories? I guess that that would maybe be burbecky or brett. I don't know. What what is the story? like oh, let's start with newtonian physics and Or or do we go back to you know pythagoras or like what like what's the what are their stories? What are what are we believing in? What what's the framework? Yeah, what does it look like? Yeah, yeah, and can it be can it be something and this is again where You know the observations that peterson made about these very old stories These stories have been worked on and worked on and worked on and compressed and compressed and compressed and added to and the bad has been moved in the Good estate and that they're purified over time and they become really durable powerful things Because they're very very old and they've been battle tested by Innumerable cultures and and and you don't just make that thing up today You won't know if you've actually done it or no one can know if you've actually done it until a hundred or a thousand years From now. We're still reading augustin. That's how huge augustin is right and But there are so few of those plato augustin aristotle Socrates there's so few of them. Yeah Jesus and then you know, well and then jesus whoever wrote the quran that's still here, too That's still here, too. That's that's still here, too like I don't agree with those practices But it's still here. That's right. That's right. Just old doesn't mean right, right? But it means you'd better take it seriously, right because and the opposite of our cultural Bias which is oh new is better might be Let's see 500 years from now how better it is. Well, i'm not going to be here 500 years from now. Uh-huh Oh little center of the universe. I just I have such a I have such a fuzzy. I don't know what they're I don't know. I don't I don't understand what they're how they're going to do this Because again i'm speaking with you Who we agree on the answer Easy peasy Because they say and look we have to live it I I you mentioned right right But both of them say you can't it can't be lived in this In this time of science. That's the answer and that answer many many people agree with And so then that's our struggle. Can you explain that when they say that? What does that mean then? Well, it's exactly what brett said in that little tweet that well You know jesus, you know if he's going to be a viable candidate for a moral philosophy You're going to have to deal with You know the magical element which is not viable in the 21st century. Exactly. That's the argument and it's a powerful argument That isn't just something that's dismissed even though I can at times be dismissive But that's a powerful argument and you and I have to wrestle with that and that's what we're doing And okay, what does it mean to be a christian now? And you know, we are not exempt from the meaning crisis. We're just as fraught by it because we stew In those same juices Okay, so that's the problem also because sometimes I I I don't mean to but I slip into that sort of hubris of well, I've got the answer but it's not easy and it's not But but then I then I slip into the bits of doubt where i'm like, oh is that And you couldn't you you cannot connect with people who are out there unless you have the doubt Okay, the doubt is important because it forces you to wrestle with the same questions Your friends and neighbors are wrestling with and that's how you actually become helpful over time So your doubt is not your enemy. Let me grab something. Hold on on the discord I've been having a lot of fun on that discord, by the way I figured you would you're kind of like a bit of a celebrity there Well, that's a problem. Oh, well Okay Never mind. I'm gonna I'm gonna create a fake account so that I don't have to be a celebrity on the discord and I can go on And people can call me a call me a jerk or whatever Okay, fine. Okay. Um I'll come as an angel unawares Entertaining angels, yeah, sorry see if anyone entertains me. Okay, so Someone wrote so okay on the discord that you invited me to a few days ago. Um, I was talking about Hey guys, is this safe for me to express my doubts here? Will I get eaten alive? And you know, they're like, oh no, this is the place for doubts, you know, and um someone uh A guy goes by the name of vaugh Who says he's an atheist, but I don't I don't he's not a kind of atheist i've ever met before but he uh He said as an atheist. Oh and my phone as an atheist when i've heard believers Expressed out it makes it seem more tangible like vulnerable and endearing in a very human way I can respect the devotion more thoroughly because it's in spite of doubt This is courageous And it made me feel very good good I bet this court is a special place filled with wonderful people. It really is. I've never had someone Who didn't? Who who was outside of my framework? Say that to me about faith and i've always had people be like, oh You're gonna you Follow that doubt because you're gonna You're gonna understand that how wrong religion is you're just You know, so it's very interesting to hear that It's interesting to hear that as an idea a way of looking at it but And it's I I do think that being honest about your doubts is important Because a lot of that sort of fundamentalist style Don't question just believe that that's not helping anyone including that person um but yeah, I I just don't know I don't know There is a there is a problem Lots of people can agree. There's a problem that Everyone everyone who i've talked to about the meaning crisis Has been like yes, there is absolutely something missing and But we don't agree on how to solve it And I don't know I don't know. I don't know how it's gonna be solved You're not god But you're just a little human being like the rest of us i'm very curious I want to know what I know, but I want to know what people think I want to know like what do you think like how that's a good thing. That's a good thing. Yeah, I know but I don't I don't It just doesn't seem I guess and not there's no easy answer even if we do have Religion as an answer. You're right. It's not like it's easy But it is something that I don't I don't think you can just create something that you call not a religion but functions as a religion. I I don't see it You said it before you can't stand the test. It has to stand the test of time, right? So you wouldn't know if you did it within your lifetime Right What okay, I guess i'm not You're like talk to them. I'm not in that space But I just I don't know it just seems Like you think you can do that you by yourself are you I mean some people did Jesus Muhammad buddha They all founded religions They've been around and look at what look where they are I was very only we only we say only one of them's alive. Well, yeah Very different christians are such cheaters. I know I guess I just i'm very like Yeah, i'm very like I don't know I don't know where this ends and it kind of sounds like you're like you won't ever No one will know but but I do think that it's important it's there are some some layers that can be late like like for conversations like this about stories And if we can get to the truth Of you don't have to have any faith to agree that there's something in humans That is like searching For something to bring meaning and I think that's a good place to end But I guess I would like like people if you don't agree with us you can say Please be kind But paul, okay, are there any closing thoughts like what do you think? Did was this did this make sense paul? Oh, this was a wonderful conversation. I think people are really gonna enjoy it and get a lot out of it I feel like nothing was solved and then I don't even know if I said what I wanted to That's what youtube is for there's always another recording. There's always another shot to get it right. I'm still left I don't know if I know like i'm still like I think I might have more questions now Well, that's fine Then you'll have plenty of meaningful things to do for the next couple of decades Well, I did cover you know what this covered the christian perspective, which is it's not something I've really covered on my channel before I did touch on it with esther But this kind of it really fully pulls that out and teases it out. So I appreciate you for being that face for me and I think it's uh I think I think we're done Okay, done. Okay. Okay. I think so. I think so. I think this was good. Okay. Thanks. Thanks paul