https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=HTZ4aK7bVto

 share. I bet. So, so you're dedicated. Yeah, well, it just kind of worked out that way. You know, the since the pandemic, my schedule sort of got disrupted in terms of my in real life seeing people schedule. So now we do zoom for church and phone calls for church and so spend a lot of time in this little office. We've got the same thing going. You can hear me. Yes. Yep. Yep. Yeah. We've got the same thing going with, you know, in medicine, we're changing a lot of things to online stuff, even patient visits, we're seeing patients through the telephone or sometimes through video. Hopefully that won't last forever, because I don't think it's a solution in the long haul. But yeah, we've been doing that. It's got to be a little strange. I know, you know, I talked to a certain number of therapists, and you know, they're seeing clients over the phone. And it's everybody sort of getting a deep introduction into the upsides and the downsides of this. Yeah, I think it does show you for my in my part of it. It shows you you can do more than you might have thought. But there's also a core part of it that you just can't do it. You can't do and it's not right to try to do it that way. And so to some degree, that's going to evolve and hopefully we'll pick out the right subpopulation to be doing this with and then and then go ahead and be able to do the the in person visits when it's necessary, which is hopefully what we'll get to pretty soon. Yeah, yeah. So I'm sure you've got a bunch of things on your mind. So let's dive in. Sure. Yeah, I've got all sorts of possibilities. And then you as usual, we'll always throw a curveball on it because your recent stuff since particularly since since your talk with Julian, I think is there's been a series of them that have piqued my interest and have some things to talk about. I'm not sure exactly where to start. But maybe maybe because of my profession, we could start with just a little talk about the Coronavirus and its and its I don't know, implications are how we're going to think about it. And I guess the thing that rather than talking about the science of it, I'm not right all that interested in that. And I appreciate you getting me in touch with Sam, because I had an interesting talk with him about the modeling and we were able to geek out a little bit on that. So that was fun and fun to get to talk with him more directly. So that was fun. But Sam's a great guy to talk to. He's Yeah, he's really a lot of fun. Yeah. I'm interested in your thoughts a little bit on the on the whole thing in terms of, you know, what's been the well, you know, what do we what do we think about the Coronavirus in terms of its implications in terms of our, our Christian take on it, but but maybe also what other people have said about it, you may have heard Tom Holland on unbelievable. And those kinds of comments, I'm a little interested in that. But perhaps I'll poke the start of it with something along these lines as to, you know, where are we? And how would you talk about the balance in Christian thought of moral evil versus natural evil, and how we integrate that into our, our lived experience or lived practice of religion? And are we? Well, what do you think about that question? I mean, I can give you some of my thoughts about a little bit, but yeah, that's a good question. Yesterday, I, I was, you know, I sort of, you know, I try to balance my day, where I mean, something like we're doing right now is very focus intensive. And so say, I'll, I've been in focused conversations for more than two hours today. And then some of the, you know, your 15 minutes, 10 minutes, 15 minutes, I get a little bit of exercise running around the church because it's empty. And then also maybe go on Twitter and just kind of scroll and give other places, basically doing some disruption in terms of the patterns. And I bumped into Malcolm Geitz. He's been writing some poetry. And just, I very seldom see him on Twitter, he had just tweeted out a poem that he wrote. And he had had a little audio recording of himself and his poetry. And when I heard it, I thought, yeah, this is what Tom Holland is asking for. Because Tom, you know, Tom noted that when the coronavirus came down, British clerics were basically out there giving public service announcements, not unlike what you'd get from the local TV news, or from your county health officials. And, you know, I noticed that and I thought about it part of, I had done some of that too, because when it came down, I wanted the members of my congregation to take the physical medical side of it seriously, because I knew many of our older members would not. But one of the things that I immediately saw, because of the population, a very diverse population, right away, I saw that a lot of black folks weren't taking it very seriously. And there are some real sociological reasons for that, because in many ways, you know, that I might complain usually with the critical, critical race theory people, it's not so much that their recognition of the racial layers in our society. I don't just, I agree with some of what they're noticing about this. And so that part of the part of the medical speak done by the state was simply understood as white people talk. And it wasn't until offices started closing downtown, and businesses started closing, that suddenly people began to say, Oh, this is serious, and then started taking it serious. So seriously, so on one hand, your minister saying something to you, you take differently from the public health official. And so in that way, we're sort of talking about the same thing, wash your hands, keep social distancing, take this seriously. And, and this actually has very old roots, because churches have for a very long time and continue to do very basic things in people's lives of caring for people in a very physical way. And so churches are these generalists that overlap on lots of areas. But then, then Tom Holland, I think quite rightly was talking about, we're not getting from church, what only churches should do. And that is very much addressing your question of, of natural evil. And, and so Malcolm Geist poem, just, just I thought struck just the right note, and I'll post the, I'll post a link to it. I better make myself a note. In that, at this point, only the church in some ways can speak to this, because part of what has happened, and you know, you're the one that really I have to thank you for, you know, turning me on to the Wilfred Sellers. Yeah. I've used that a lot. I've colonized you a little bit. Yeah, you have, you have. So congratulations. But if you're looking through the scientific image, because there's, there's no normative in that image, there's only descriptive, there's no such thing as natural evil. There's only the things that come from nature that we don't like. Because I'm, you know, a virus, the virus, we would assert, you know, it's indiscriminate. It's if it kills grandma's, it's right. It doesn't. It's now maybe, for hosts of different reasons, I just just did a very interesting conversation today with, again, with Brett Sockel, the Roman Catholic. Yeah, I'm gonna look forward to that one. Yeah, I'm gonna post that one tomorrow. It's a very interesting conversation. But, you know, the virus doesn't care if you're rich or poor, black or white. Now the your poverty and all these kinds of things might impact, you know, how the virus or your body and the virus begin to respond to one another. But so this category of natural evil, the church has, for a long time, negotiated and learned to speak about, but that capacity, I think in many ways has been seriously disrupted. And I think perhaps intimidated by the power of those who effectively wield the scientific image for the good, such as doctors. Yeah, I mean, I think, yeah, I mean, I think that, and maybe I and maybe I'm pointing at the wrong thing with my term natural evil, because I was thinking of the virus as natural evil, that is to say, as, as the things we see in the world that don't have, well, maybe this is modernist kind of speak, because it's something that we, we see in the natural world, which we take, you know, as an evil, but that is capricious and neutral, because we have this scientific image of things. And I, you know, I personally find myself in my own Christian faith, let's say, you know, reframing a lot of things in a way that's unique, I think, because of my profession. So I, you know, as, as medicine is in perfect in this way, but it definitely has that as its ideal, a way of viewing, you know, everyone is as equal when it comes to the care that we provide. And so any notion that what is happening to them might be the consequence of bad behavior, let's say, is not going to really influence the way we view it. So, so, and we're going to take care of patients neutrally on that, that score, we're going to take care of, let's say lung cancer, which clearly was caused by smoking, we're going to be we're going to take care of that as a natural evil, that is to say, we're not going to be judgmental, or in any way modify the way we care for that patient simply because there might have been a behavioral element to it. And, and so in a way, even what might be categorized as moral evils, and I can talk about more egregious versions of moral evil that lead to medical problems, we're going to, we're going to disregard that, and we're going to, and we're going to flatten that all out, and we're going to do our best to take care of every patient in the in that in that same way. And, and so in a certain sense, my theology, ultimately, at base is going to be influenced by that as seeing this this version of natural evil that I'm just talking about, which might not be exactly what you were talking about, but this version of natural evil is going to be more fundamental than moral evil. And moral evil is going to be seen as weakness, rather than as, you know, as some sort of ontologic category of its own, let's say, or metaphysical category of its own. And in a way, I think that does color my overall theological view changes what I think about the fall, for example, I am less inclined to see the kind of disobedience of Eve as the primary thing and more the, the kind of, you know, kind of, kind of change in Adam and Eve in terms of their, their being they're being changed, essentially, epistemologically, to now be able to see good and evil in the world. I don't know if any of that made sense. But, but, and so I see that I see the intuition in the public, the kind of urge in the public to try to translate the coronavirus into a moral evil, you can see that in the search for the origin of it and the effort to try to find someone to blame, you know, but even that ends up taking a moral fault, making a moral fault of a, of a competence fault of a, you know, that the, the, the wet market was the source of this. And that's just incompetence. And is incompetence the same thing as moral evil? And they try to translate for you try to look further. And maybe it's this lab that was the source. But even the lab would the way it's being framed, the lab would be incompetence, right? It was just a lab that was trying to do good things, but they were just, they weren't secure enough, they were incompetent. But then of course, there's the deeper conspiracy that wants to translate that into a agency, some sort of evil malevolent agency attached to, to this, you know, structure of government in China that we perhaps don't feel good about. But that would be the step towards translating this thing that seems to be a natural thing into, into a moral evil that then somehow activates a certain kind of thing in people that makes them in a certain, in a, in a not very attractive sense, feel better that they can blame somebody blame some moral thing and get into a kind of a moral or a righteousness battle. Yeah, I don't know how much you think you think about all that. But I see that as, as human nature, and that perhaps we've moved over time, perhaps the same thrust of, of the change in history that Charles Taylor talks about as the secular age, we've moved from a, from a time of where more and more things are are negligence, and less and less things could be identified as, as moral. What do you think about all that? That's a lot of kind of crazy ideas. Whoa, there's a lot there and a lot ties into so many of the conversations, you know, the agency issues, of course, with my conversations with John Vervecki and I, I mean, agency is a big deal in those conversations between the theist and a non theist, because, you know, the dividing line is agency in there. The, you know, the incompetence, you know, if we think about Jordan Peterson, I mean, his, his big argument against the kind of coloring, coloring what we might look at as agent less, perhaps negative consequences of history that get panned out, but, but fairly reliably tagged, according to, let's say, racism or sexism or something, or class warfare. Jordan Peterson, of course, always attempted to offset that with, you know, you don't, the goodness of a plumber is not in, you know, if you're, if you've got sewage backing up into your house, you're looking for a competent plumber, there isn't a vast conspiracy, the conversation I just finished with, with, with Brett Sackle was in fact on conspiracy theories, and that mapped all over the place, as our conversation progressed. But this, you know, going all the way back to, you know, natural evil, the, I've for a long time wondered if the line between Christian and non Christian and all of the deconstructions away from it, sort of reinforced my thinking is, is to what degree are we able to trust in the midst of suffering? And to what degree we cannot, for example, I mean, what really is the, so you have a virus, which I'm not a biologist from from what I understand, and listening is that you've got a little bit of RNA and a kind of a lipid sack. And they're just out there. And basically, the only way that these things multiply or replicate is if they get into a body that that matches up to them so that they can reproduce themselves. I mean, they're, they're parasitical. And, and, and so then you have people say, well, similar to what is the what is really the, why would God make mosquitoes? Why would God make viruses? And, you know, so I talking to people, and, and then I just heard a little bit of something that caught my attention when, and I don't know if it's true or not, someone said, Well, you know, viruses actually in nature, and again, now we can't hear that word nature, without hearing it in a post D ism frame. Well, viruses are important so that bacteria don't run amok. And I thought, I didn't know viruses and bacteria had any kind of relation. There's just two categories of what you take, you take an antibiotic, if you have a bacterial infection, and you don't take one, if you've got a viral infection, I'm a layman when it comes to these terms. But the, the thing that haunts us is, is we look at the again, natural order, and, and come to the conclusion that this is not a very safe place. And that there are viruses and bacteria and lions and tigers and bears that care not for whether or not I said my prayers, or prayed to the correct God, or beat my wife or didn't beat my wife. This thing can come in and take me. And there's no negotiating with it. There's no pleading with it. And so yeah, I that I, and I think you're exactly right, watching this thing play out in the public imaginary, I mean, very quickly, Trump was talking about war against an invisible enemy. Oh, so we're, we're, we're using that kind of language, well, because war sort of mobilizes us. And, you know, so I was doing some work on reading the problem of pain again, and thinking about how Lewis talks about we have, you know, not only are five senses, we really have a sense of the numinous, and we have this moral sense. And this with this moral sense, we look at a virus and say, well, if I if I don't find any purpose that I value in nature from it, it must be evil. But did, you know, does Satan make viruses? And so and this, of course, has played out long in Christian conversations about the fall, you know, someone noted, well, our bodies don't work without this layer of dead skin. So what was Adam covered with if there was no death until he and Eve ate from the tree? And what exactly did happen in this fall that we find in Genesis three? And, of course, for someone like me in a reform theological camp, who some of those somewhat there's landmines under some of those questions in certain church circles. Absolutely. For now, just for me, and I just speak for myself, and I have a kind of I think, somewhat eclectic and kind of well, eclectic version of Christianity, none of that is problematic for me, because I, you know, to the to the well, I won't, well, I won't shy away from proclaiming my Christian faith. I'll also say, I think the thing's all allegorical. So I seen us like, that's not a problem for me. And so I'm not look, you know, I know that lots of people see those landmines. And I definitely have a lot of interest in following people, try to avoid those landmines or try to deal negotiate those landmines. And in fact, I think it's, I just lost my train of thought there that the that I think it's one of the things about the Bible that makes it very interesting makes it different than let's say, Shakespeare is how seriously people take it. You know, even if you weren't even let's say you weren't even Christian, you were just you were just an academic, we're thinking about wow, interesting. I want to look through the history of literature. And I want to, I want to be interested in, in what's the best place to study. One of the reasons to study the biblical text is that people take it very seriously. And that makes the way in which people interpret it entirely different. Right stakes for a difference of opinion about the interpretation of Hamlet are not really very high. You know, but the stakes but apparently to a lot of people, the stakes involved in what we mean by the fall, that means a whole lot to a lot of people. And, and because of that, the whole conversation takes on a whole different level of gravitas, and reveals a lot about the way people are and how they how they see things. And, and that makes it very interesting, just separate from, you know, how I personally interpret the whole thing. But that's not that's not disconnected from your profession because I as a pastor, so we kind of see people on two different sides, someone goes into someone comes into my office, and they're doing something and I'd say, you know, that you you'd better really look at this area of your life and get it in check, or there's going to be some serious consequences. People come into your office and say the same thing. And we would imagine well, in the secular age, people will take you far more seriously than they'll take me. And both of us know. Not necessarily true. Yeah, what frames are and you know, this is playing out in real time with this virus. Because I have, I regularly talk to senior citizens who will say to me things like, if the Lord takes me, the Lord takes me, I'm not going to adjust my behavior one wit with respect to this virus. And I think, yeah, you get this virus. It's probably, we're probably done. So let's see, I'll go in another direction, because that that triggers me on something that you and Luke were talking about recently. And I want to I want to see if I can develop this thing because he he's got a he's got a certain idea that I've always liked, which is this, this fact that he thinks that we've over emphasized, we've conflated the power need the importance of the propositional as opposed to the other four other three P's of Verveki. And you had that conversation a little bit with him about that. And I totally agree with that. But I would, but I want to take a little bit of a different spin on that, that your last comment, I think brings up. And that is that, and you, I think we're trying to make the similar point with Luke in your conversation. I think these peas, these four peas need to be taken holistically. And we really can't avoid doing all four peas simultaneously. I mean, we're not, we're holistic in this sense. And, and give a quick example of, you know, my family, we do a Sunday dinner, we, we've got a tradition out of a Sunday dinner, and we all gather and my wife makes dinner and I do the dishes and we're all together. Well, there's all four peas involved in that, right? We there's a procedural thing, there's perspectival thing, there's, what's the other one? Participatory, participatory. And, and in that mix are some propositional that, that some of which are can be explicit, maybe we even have made explicit, you know, the dinner is more important than football. That's a proposition that we're accepting. And some of them that aren't even explicit that are that are in there that we could deconstruct if we wanted and pull out. But all four of those things are going on at the same time. And this is the way we are. Yes. And so just to move to your example, cigarette smoking is a very similar kind of a thing, right? There's a world there. To use Charles Taylor's word, there's an imaginary that surrounds cigarettes, which was more powerful in the past, but still exists. And there is procedural stuff, there's a feeling of that pack of cigarettes, and there's a sequence of things you do. And there's that little plastic tab that you rip off. And there's all that's very procedural. And there's, there's participatory and there's prospectival. And it turns out there's also propositional. Yeah, which is one of the ones you mentioned there's like, I'm gonna die something, and I like to smoke. That's a proposition that that that makes sense. So in these worlds, are all this stuff. And propositions live in those worlds, they don't live outside those worlds. And, and that then makes for postmodern view of the world right there. Because if truth is embedded in some sort of web of belief, then how can you know, we can start down the trail, how can we is there objective truth and all that. And that raises the deeper problem that I think is there that Luke was not quite at. And that is our ability, our wisdom, in terms of choosing our worldviews that we allow ourselves to be embedded in. And how do we discernment and wisdom are, are very difficult to get our fingers on as to how we how we deal with that, you know, and how can you get out of a worldview where cigarette smoking is is got propositional truths that seem pretty solid to you. And then we can write, write this in a larger frame that we live in a secular age. And that secular age comes with all sorts of presuppositions that we're not in any way aware of. And some of those presuppositions are propositional, and they're very hard to resist or not believe in. And, you know, I don't know, that's just a that's just a set of ideas that that is, I'll go to another level of and I'll let you comment first, but well, no, I agree with everything you just said, it's built in and it's interesting to me how how often the question of propositions come up across the firing lines over theism versus let's say atheism. It's those dog but I mean, every time I hear Sam Harris say to George, it's those dog buzz. And I'm thinking, what like you don't have any. Right. I'm seeing I'm seeing I'm seeing Sam Harris and he we could be he could be our whipping board for the yeah, he's in his little office. He's got all these propositions. And he's got them all written down. He's just like, wow, these things really click, right. And so then he goes in front of his audience, right. And he's like throwing out these propositions. And what happens is like this hooting and hollering in the audience. It's very participatory and it's very prospectival and it's finished for some procedural there. I mean, it's a whole little worldview. Yeah. And so then and so then sort of the I mean, sort of like the the seeker movement, you know, I talking to Jonathan Peugeot today, you know, take out the organ and take out the crosses and, you know, have that place bare and have a jazz band and, you know, then set up the pastor to talk about Proverbs and some wisdom and then, you know, bring him to the Jesus moment and bang. And then the emergence, you know, have their stomach have their fill of that. And now, you know, we're going to put crosses everywhere and we're gonna we're Protestant, but we're gonna have something kind of like holy water, and we'll call it that remembering our baptism and, and we just okay, so, so, so, so you kind of had enough propositions now, so you're going to kind of push them to the edge of your plate. You still need a balanced diet. Those I think you're exactly right. Those four P's are in some ways like, you know, the refraction of light. Oh, okay, you like yellow and orange and purple and blue. Well, they're all there. But we're all bathed in this white light that we're sitting in the midst of. It's a it's a it's a descriptor of our experience, which is useful to see. But it doesn't. But it's not it doesn't offer any discrimination. It doesn't offer any any wisdom in and of itself. And so this is this raises a way of framing this that David Bentley Hart did for me. And it's not important that he did it. But but who was I gonna talk? Oh, I know it was it was Eric Weinstein. You've got me you've colonized me with Eric Weinstein. That was hard because at first I was like, this guy, man, he this jargony, eco kind of the leadest speak inside baseball stuff. I'm like, he doesn't need to talk that way. And because he's talking that way, I'm not interested. But since you were poking on it, I listened to him and today's or yesterday's. Did you did you hear the one the portal the most recent one that he did, I think with his son or something? No esters Esther keeps he got to listen to the one way to his son. And it's like, yeah, I'm working on it. The first part of it, that's just the intro that I was interested in, because he talks about he talks about taste. And this is a point that David Bentley Hart makes as well. And that is that if you go back to prior generations, let's take CS Lewis, Tis, Elliot, my favorite, that that era of education or in the 19th century, education was about developing taste. It was about learning, you know, if you wanted to try to figure out who were good, you needed to learn the language in great depth, to be able to distinguish great literature from not so great literature. And teaching that was the thrust of the of the education, teaching taste, in the best version of what that might mean, you know, and that's what we kind of have undermined in a great way by by by demeaning the canon. It doesn't mean that the canon has to be stable, we can change the canon, but we should still have a high attitude towards towards taste and, and developing the skill to recognize quality to go to Sevilla. And it's a skill, it's a very difficult skill to teach. If you've ever talked to someone who tries to teach writing, it's it's not or art, it's a very difficult thing to teach. And we've just kind of diminished the value of that and moved over to a kind of now I'm going to go back and support Luke's case, moved over to it, all you really need to do is be able to understand these propositions and how they interlock. And that's how you get the answer. Right. And, and I think that undermines our ability to, to do this discrimination that I'm talking about between worldviews and what the way David Bentley Hart talks about this is that he in his most recent book on beauty, I think it is the infant, not not the most recent book, but the one that's about beauty. He starts that off by developing an argument that that we need to get back to rhetoric, rather than a kind of expository discourse and that expository discourse, which is like lecturing and producing an argument for a set of facts. He envisions in his kind of exaggerated style as violence. He talks about it as violence because it's, it's, it's impressing upon the audience a kind of constraint. And that's the mode of relationship between the, let's say the speaker or the writer and the audience is a kind of normative command on, you know, you either assent to this or you don't because I crafted this argument in such, you know, so strongly. And he argues for going to rhetoric, which he talks about as really being quality arguments or arguments that he talks about as aesthetic. The reason to choose something is that it's, that it's pleasing or is that it has quality or that you've developed a taste for it. And you make a choice based on your your preference in that in that domain. And he's almost arguing that the Christian faith is one of that kind of choice. That is to say it's, it's, it's better because it's, because it's, it's the one I choose as the beautiful description of our experience, not because it's propositionally sound. I don't know how that works. That's really interesting. That's that's now you're you're kind of you're doing it again. I think that I think that there's a lot of important stuff right there. The the things that I so you know, I make videos, and there's always, you know, people out there, which is a completely natural thing to do. Well, Paul, you should make you should make more videos like this, you should make more videos like that. And of course, everybody sort of colonizes along the lines of whatever colony they're coming from. And but you know, your, your point here is David Bentley Hart's observation, I think goes in a lot of different places and very much maps, maps on, you know, why the what's the aesthetic move from the seeker church to the, you know, the now the neo sacramental, you know, and of course, the seekers started moving there when they were talked about, well, bringing the arts back into church. But of course, for the seekers, the arts were just on different wavelengths. So we'll have musical arts. And, you know, I, in my conversation with Jonathan Peugeot today, we were talking about sort of the ecumenism. And he said, Yeah, I went to this Pentecostal church and they're having a Christmas program. And I could, I could hang in there when they brought in the donkeys and the little Christmas pageant. But when they had the acrobats, that was it. Those don't belong in church now we're I mean, of course, Jonathan is Jonathan is an artist. And so yeah, he's about, he's about the aesthetics. And of course, rhetoric is, is the aesthetic side of the, you know, of the speech, right wavelength. And, and you're exactly right that the, you know, the modernist, you know, we're gonna gotcha with prepositional dueling. Yeah, exactly. And whereas, you know, David Bentley Hart comes in, well, he's obviously also playing to his strengths. Because sometimes when he speaks, I get the sense that he's so absolutely impressed by the beauty of what he's saying. And it's beautiful indeed. But he's a little he's a little narcissistic about it because his love for his his love for his craft. There's no doubt about that. Yeah, everybody's got their quirkiness. Everybody's got their quirkiness. He's definitely got to. But I think I think you're I think you're I think that's very right. And we're seeing that in in the in the move of people in to back into the liturgical sacramental wing of the church, and people who will say things like, you know, well, I don't, I don't really believe a lot of this stuff. But there's just something about the liturgy, something about the pageantry. And and of course, you know, we're all these layered human beings. And so I don't I don't know what I'm getting from that church. And I certainly don't believe what the church has to say about sex or class or politics. But, you know, I'm in on the rest of it. Yeah, I'm in on the rest of it. And of course, you know, if they come into my office, I'd say, tell me more about that. Because, you know, we this gets into some of, you know, Ian McGilchrist stuff that our culture has gotten terribly lopsided to one of the hemispheres. Right. And and the church has sort of followed along with that lopsidedness will either follow it or created. Because, no, I think that's I think that's an apt critique. And and very true. And we'll continue to watch as that role as it lays itself out, as Peugeot often says, as the because you know, what I kind of expect as a as a plain church Calvinist is that you'll get to a point of that and then go back the other way. You and that, you know, not big trends, but it's always we're always going back and forth between them. We have to. And because with one side, because if you're if you're not doing that, well, you get dissonance, you get too much difference in difference in it's on one side, it doesn't just Okay, time to explode. So you throw everything up in the air. And then you kind of have to do the reconstruction at some point. And that's a very costly and messy thing on many layers and layers of our lives. And but a lot of that is exactly what's happening in the church and in the West right now. Yeah, what this here's here's a question for you. And I'll be I'll be I'll be stronger about this than maybe I wanted to be. John, Jordan Peterson struggled to answer the question, you know, does he believe or you know, what do you commit to, to belief? Well, I'm gonna ask you the question now, your my question for you of a similar vein is what is it that you're doing with your with your project here? And let me just throw out a few sketches of it so that you can understand where I'm coming from. Two videos you did one where you can't remember the one you talked about. This Oh, you deconstructed Eric Weinstein's conversation. And then after that you brought in the next one you brought in route and his secular age thing. So what I saw you do in there was on the one hand, you were deconstructing the secular world. And then the other one deconstructing the pastoral world or the Christian world on on a somewhat similar grounds. And why are you doing that deconstruction? Because I can't quit because you can't job. It's probably why I do it because it's just what comes to mind. It's what just forces itself on you. But, you know, well, Andrew roots, you know, you in Andrew roots book is is really honest about the lostness of the clergy in the secular age, right? Because certain kinds of doubt now not all clergy are lost, mind you. The the law, I mean, I think the lostness of the mainline was Eugene Peterson saw that I don't know if you're familiar with Eugene Peterson, Eugene Peterson, one of the more successful, moderate, evangelical, he was a guy who sort of would bridge the mainline Eugene Peterson and right at the end of his life, he kind of got caught in the LGBT trap, because someone asked him a question and he gave an answer. And very quickly, the publishers freaked the heck out. And he had to walk it back. And he was at that point, he was, you know, fairly close to the end of his life. But Eugene Peterson had been exploring these issues. So even you know, the unnecessary pastor, that's something I got from Peterson, Eugene Peterson. Because clergy have, you know, if let's say you're a you're a Roman Catholic priest before the Reformation. Well, and you're not too cross pressured. Well, it's pretty clear what you're doing. You're, you know, you're, you're enacting the sacraments and you're, you know, distributing the body and blood of Christ and souls are partaking in the excess merits of the saints and being translated through purgatory into heaven. I mean, it's very there it is. Yeah. Um, well, and then what Andrew Root really does nicely in that paragraph is sort of walk through the various states of the imaginary as we go along. And then you get into the 20th century, or you get into the 21st century, especially, and Tom Holland's question about, well, the clergy don't seem to know what the heck their job is. And Andrew Root says, Well, you're darn right. They if it looks that way, it's because it's true. And they don't know what their job is. Now, the Pentecostal pastor down the road. Well, he's saving souls. He knows what he's doing. Right. But it's all of these. Well, what the Pentecostal pastor has done is basically denied the secular frame. But, you know, if you once they once they do a little bit more talking and get cross pressured enough, they'll be like, you know, Paul and lightener who, who's been in his own deconstructions and working things through. So you know, when you asked me what the heck I'm doing, I'm working my stuff out. Yeah. And, you know, I'm not paying a therapist 100 bucks a week to listen to me. Y'all are doing it for free. And talking back. That's no that's, that's good. I'll tell you my version of it. And you started into it. There's this is Charles Taylor, I think, you know, I've had all these moments in my kind of intellectual life that have been, you know, important and, and secular age was, that was a very, and still is for me a very central thing. And I read that 2001 2002 right after came out. And I, you know, I remember the moment reading it, actually, I was saying to myself, you know, I've been studying this stuff all my life, just so it's possible for me to read this book. And that was the kind of experience you can't that's right. So that and that's still been that way for me. And I was just rereading it because you've kind of prompted me to, and you're starting with the priest in the 1500s just goes right into what I the idea that I was searching for in there. And that is his notion of naive belief. And he talks about the circumstance before 1500. And it has to be probably even well before 1500 because the Protestant Reformation doesn't happen in a vacuum. So, you know, maybe all the way back to hoose or something like that, where Oh, further back. Who? Who was I reading? Well, you know, the 11th century, something happens. And maybe it goes all the way, maybe never stops, you know, it could be turtles all the way down. But in any case, there's a sense of naive belief, which basically means not so much that everybody knows all the propositions. That's not what it means. It means that they're in worlded, they're in that world. And the world is not problematic. And even if you have some sort of alternate idea that cop crops in your head, it doesn't matter because the world carries its whole integrity. And that contains in it, the enchanted world for his word, but in the Christian context, a theistic view. And the progress through to history to now is that we flipped it over. Now, having some sort of notion of agency, which you talked about, and we're trying to kind of bump into vervecky with, that's can't be held naively. It is problematic to hold that you can hold it, but it's problematic. And you have to swim against the stream to hold it. Whereas underneath, there is a naive secularism, secular humanism, secular humanism with some naturalism as the base or something like that. That's the naive belief that, from my perspective, we all inherit, whether we like it or not, it's what is our view. And everything that we do on top of that is going to be in in reaction to that or in counterpoint to that. And so now we'll get to the new atheists. And I tried the first time I talked to you tried to describe what I thought about this, I've got a little different twist on it now, the new atheists come up because the secular frame has become problematic. And you don't need to be an apologist for a naive view. There aren't any apologists for a naive view, because it's not necessary. The world is just the way it is. So as soon as you see an apologist, you know that the frame has been problematized. And Jordan Peterson walks in and he's now walking into that space where the secular frame has to some degree become problematized. It's become a problem for itself. And it needs to explain itself, it needs to frame up some kind of propositional structures to make it make sense. And that is a new phase, if you will. And I think that you're what you're doing is actually kind of poking around at that trying to see those openings and create a space and realization that, look, this thing that we take from our inheritance is not without its, you know, openings for legitimate authentic, different views. I think you're exactly right. That was really, really helpful. That was really helpful. And, you know, why did 9-11, it's so funny, because a little while ago, it was, it was Michael, who I had just had talked with Michael and Karen recently, but Michael was the one who pointed Luke to the Jordan Peterson personality 12 video. I rewatched that and I thought, oh, yeah, there's so much of Peterson is distilled right into that little video. Well, why was it 9-11 that sort of sparked the new atheists? Well, because, you know, the new atheists very much wanted to present the 9-11 terrorists as holdout from holdouts from the Middle Ages, you know, and what I mean holdouts, I mean, you know, true holdouts, but they're not. They're postmodern Islamists, in that most of the 9-11 attackers were people who had one degree or another of Western education. And, you know, many of the many of the terrorists were coming out of, you know, places in Western Europe, where, you know, they had here's, here's the modern offering of education and worldview. And, and here's the power of the scientific image. And, you know, if you if you this, this is designed to finally satisfy what all of the longings of the ages, you know, tried to address but failed. And they saw what was before them on the platter and said, yeah, in fact, I'm going to go headlong completely. I am going to try to recapture naivete. But with a box cutter, right with a box cutter. That's right. And so the new I think you're exactly right, because then the new atheists very quickly have to step into the frame. That's right, and become the apologists for the modern era. And they're continuing to do that. And so, you know, Steven Pinker, no, no, no, pay no attention to the guys driving planes into buildings. This is the world really here. There's nothing to see here. That's right here. And utopia, I, you know, I really wonder, in the middle of the, you know, adds new adds adds to adds new depths to Douglas Murray's Strange Death of Europe title, when the pandemic rolls through Spain and France, and the UK, and Italy. So yeah, you know, and when it comes, you know, back to the pandemic question, the deep, the deep ways in which we have yet to see how this thing rolls out. But, you know, the deep ways in which the pandemic continues to shake the confidence of the modern era. And, well, then suddenly people start looking around for things to believe in and well, there were, you know, Islamists there who were more than happily looking for recruits and, you know, especially people of a certain ancestry to get them in touch with their roots. And in some ways, in the West, people looking for Orthodox and Roman Catholic cathedrals are doing the same thing, except, obviously, some of the differences are vital in terms of the way they're going to express these things. So yeah, the sadness in the use of the cathedrals for morgues, rather than for their intended purpose. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So no, that's very, very good and very, very helpful. And the difficulty, of course, is that we by definition, we don't construct the naive. Right. It's given to us. It's given to us. It's, it's that first draft that we, you know, sort of turn into a palimpsest where we, you know, let's, let's, oh, I was raised this question. Strike that off. Strike that off. And I'm going to write other things and people hold it up to the light and say, oh, your, your, your reconstruction has interesting roots in prior to the deconstruction that no matter how hard you work in your short life will never finally be banished. And you can see that maybe you were hinting at this in that in Eric Weinstein in his conversations a little bit reaching for something else. It's, it's very weird in his conversations. And I don't think very many people can, well, at least I had a tough time engaging in it. But the one with the Schumacher or whatever the long s name, I can't remember his name. Oh, oh, Schmock did burger. Yeah, Schmock did burger. And then the one with Ryan, somebody Ryan Holiday, holiday, right. They they're trying to look into a future there. They're trying to vision a future and they're using all this technical eco speak. That's so weird, but still. But there you can if you read between it, you can see they're trying to project some eschatology. That's right. And, and it's, it's kind of interesting that this, these are really the intellectual versions of the of the secular humanist elite, you know, yes, and and yet they're, they're, they're doing this, this is activity. And I think that you're, you're calling that out as, you know, as what they're doing, that is to say what they're doing is eschatology, I think is very interesting. It made me much more interested in those conversations. And I would ask you that question was what is the what is the endpoint here for this? What would you envision the endpoint to be? And then and then what would you think the church or what would you think Christianity as core would would be? I don't know the right term here would be expecting or wanting? Where Where are we going with this? I don't know, there's an ecumenical thing, there's a there's a trans sectarian conversation, there's your conversations that bridge to verveky and outside the theistic frame, where is where's the ideal end point of that whole whole process of conversations? Well, I would say Revelation seven, but that would betray my naive roots. Right, right. Well, one of the things that is clear, and I was just talking to Jonathan about this, what is it okay? Are we together? Are Eric Weinstein and and you working in the same direction? That's maybe to some degree, that's part of the question. I see him as kind of a frustrated preacher. Yeah. And whereas Jordan Peterson was a little bit more self knowing and honest when he wanted to find an abandoned church in Toronto to buy and propagate, he just didn't realize just how much more effective he would be as an itinerant evangelist, than well, we'll see now because, you know, if, you know, if the sequel as many sequels doesn't have the splash that the original had, maybe he will now he's got the money, maybe he will buy that building in Toronto and, and not travel so much and just hold forth to people who are interested in making the pilgrimage to see the great man. But, you know, I think, I think in many ways, Tom Holland's observation that the you know, this one idea that I get from Tom Holland, which which continues to haunt me is that while the while while let's say, India didn't buy the confessionality and the cathedral and all of the overt signs of Christianity that Britain tried to colonize them with the the secular version that went underneath and sort of kneecapped every other religion around the world. Well, here in the West, that sort of sets up secularists like Eric Weinstein and his brother Brett and Daniel Smaktenberg for for for the kind of the kind of nihilistic depression that Jordan Peterson soothed with his mythology. And, you know, the thing that the thing that the thing besides Jordan's words that caught my attention were the effect of Jordan's words on people that suddenly, you know, I was a Christian minister, people ran away from me, they didn't come to me to talk. And I started getting in the Jordan Peterson space and sometimes, how people want to talk to me. And it's like, what kind of magic did Jordan Peterson do? And, and I think I think you're exactly right that he exposed. And that's why Sam Harris very much wanted to talk to him. He exposed the he exposed the the problems of the secular frame. But he didn't, you know, yet, what he offered wasn't a lot, say, Ryan Holiday, you know, now is propagating stoicism. And when I was a young lad getting a theological education, stoicism, you know, boy, that hasn't that hasn't been an active cause or concern for quite a few years. And so who would have imagined that stoicism would be sold on YouTube, and promoted by, you know, I think, you know, sometimes people like, oh, Paul, you should go on the portal. I there are, well, you know, I've got a status problem that there's no real cause, no motivation for Eric to really have me on his show, because he'd be giving a platform to someone that he's probably not so sure should be given a platform. But it's interesting in this new space where you have Ryan Holiday and Daniel Smaktenberger and even Eric Weinstein's The Portal, which is, you know, a very sacramental notion. Yeah, notion. A Christian in that space just is a little is just a little too disturbing. Yes. And that's true. And that's that's a comment on where we're at. But you know, the one part of that conversation that really resonates with me, and I'm a I'm a Roger Scruton kind of conservative, but and you had raised this a little while ago, but they talked about Bob Dylan's All along the Watchtower and and and the references in there to the crucifixion and and to Isaiah. And you had brought up and it actually got me back to listening to the reading this Lincoln second inaugural about what was that about a month ago or something maybe a little longer. And I read through that and that is just a profound piece of writing. And right at the apex of its crescendo is a is a quote from the Bible that is not an entirely simple idea that is just embedded in this in this very dense, you know, piece of writing that really is powerful. And the question is, can we revive that the tradition where that can have power? And and I take unfortunately, I take the Bob Dylan version of that as a as a cautionary tale, because no one knows that that that song is, or not no one, but not as many people as you might imagine, understand where that comes from and how that resonates through the history of the Western tradition. But my hope would be that we would get to a point where a leader could play the role that Lincoln played in the second inaugural, and draw on the deep tradition of our whole culture, problematic as it is, and who was in a more problematic situation than Abraham Lincoln, you know, and be able to draw on those resources, those psycho technologies to use John Breveke's term and pull us together and let us, you know, present ourselves to ourselves as we are, and, and feel it authentically. And that would be my hope. And it would, it would necessarily include a Christian core, because as Tom Holland says, that is our, that is who we are. And so I got so I'm doing these little voice chats on the Discord server on Friday mornings now. And one of the first questions that came at me last week was, why are you talking about all these non Christian people like Eric Weinstein? Well, part of it is the audience. But another part of it is, as you know, I was talking to Jonathan Peugeot, you know, the themes that that are in that are in Robert Putnam's book, 1960 JFK, you know, Catholics lined up behind him, that you know, 2004 JFK, this time, John Kerry, you know, split, but probably lost the Catholic vote. And this upcoming election, we have a Roman Catholic versus a, a Frisian, you know, progressive, a Frisian prosperity gospel Calvinist. And, you know, does that map on Democrat? Yeah. And so all of the church labels have been, they're all gone. And so church, some churches that are highly religious, you know, now in this, now in this cross pressured wild west have thick walls and, and lots of watchtowers. But out here outside, when Eric, I can't listen to Eric Weinstein and not hear him longing for the kingdom of God, but he doesn't have the words. That's right. He doesn't have the words. That's exactly what those conversations feel like to me. And that's why they went to something like, we've, you know, I can't remember exactly how they framed it was something like we've lost the ability to, and then they draw on something like, like Bob Dylan's song, well, that's what we've lost. We've lost our tradition, we let it go. We've, we've, you know, we've frittered it away, or at least it feels that way now to me. And so hopefully, we can move in the other direction at some point and, and, and realize that we are the product of our, our history, but and, and, you know, I think Tom Holland's point is that all again, the point is that that's why I was so delighted to find read Tom Holland's book because like, this guy's saying what I've been trying to say, all these wars are Christian civil wars. Right. And so you've got, you know, you've got Eric Weinstein, who doesn't believe in God. So there's a proposition that he says right over here, but yet goes to synagogue because, you know, there's something to that and it has some value somewhere. But now when it gets to our eschatology, the only kind of believable vehicle he can comprehend, just like most of the secularists is fundamentally political. And now suddenly he sees that, well, politics is so he doesn't find politics to be a believable vehicle. So what does he have left? And, and what he, what he's, when he's doing his portal, when he sort of lets himself be transparent and vulnerable, that's often his most compelling side. And it's a, and I hear it as a cry. I hear it as a cry for, you know, for the God of the universe to reach down and do something for us. And I think children, it's in the wilderness. That's right. And it's in the wilderness in the sense that it's, he doesn't know his name. You know, and Moses asked, well, who sent you? I am sent me. Oh, who's that? That's where we're at. But it's the wilderness that I was going to refer to is this a historical wilderness that we're in now. And, and you've made this point before about the, the, the fact that Christianity can incorporate its own problematic nature into its moving forward through, through history. And I think that's exemplified in Lincoln so well that we have to be able to, we have to be able to recognize the deep moral corruption of what we are experiencing. And, and, and yet, assent and affirm the move forward anyway. And, and, and that is a conservative instinct that I think we have to re revive. I mean, and that's really embedded. I mean, think about Lincoln at that moment. You know, this is a deep corrupt crime that had taken place for centuries before that moment. And then he's standing there just four years after this repeated self-immolation that was the consequence of that 300 year corruption. And we're still living it today. Yeah. Well, and yet he was, he was affirming the history that brought him to that moment. He was, he was, he was owning it and celebrating it. Yeah. And he had to be brought to that moment because, you know, again, in the hagiography that we have around Lincoln, we forget that the Emancipation Proclamation only freed the slaves in the rebel states. And there were the border states that held slaves who, you know, had to wait to be freed by the constitutional amendment, which of course could only be raw once you no longer have, you know, slave owners winning elected office. And, you know, that the whole history there, I remember- We're all sinners. We are all sinners. Yeah, that's right. Lincoln was a sinner. There's no doubt about it. That's right. That's exactly right. And, you know, actually, I just got into some Twitter conversation today on, you know, Ravi Zachariah, who passed away. And well, you know, there's, you know, and so I know that either in the 240 obituary or in the 1000 word obituary, you know, certain things will come in. And I was just simply because I don't really have a dog in the Ravi Zachariah fight, but this is who we are and how we are. And I remember in the Ken Burns, I think it was in the Ken Burns Civil War, Civil War documentary, I think it was Shelby Foote, who, you know, what a poet from the South noted that, you know, Lincoln, you know, it's the second inaugural, the war is, is pretty much won. Everybody knows which way it's going to go. And Lincoln will go from a wartime president to a reconstruction president. And of course, sounds this note, which I think in many ways, defined American politics for a very long time, a note of reaching across to the enemy. And now pay attention, he's, he's attempting to recon to to reach across to slave owners. And of course, Lincoln is assassinated. And Andrew Johnson, who is the first American president to be impeached, then becomes the president over reconstruction. And of course, Ulysses S. Grant will follow and, and then the result. And then the, you know, the, the the word that survives history, that came down all the way to me in the 1970s and 80s, learning my American history will be carpet baggers. And that word takes on such resonance of, you know, corruption. And these, these helpers from the north are here to and of course, the well, and we continue to and we continue the moral corruption without perfect correction. And, and that would have been something you could have anticipated. And it was something we can decry today. But I just don't I don't think that that Coates, I can't pronounce his first name, you know, who I'm not the coach, I don't think coach is is I don't think he he he is the vision that we want. I think that Martin Luther King has a better vision. And, and we, you know, we need that, we need to come together on the on the problematic nature of our, our history, but hold on to it nonetheless. And and and hopefully we haven't gotten to the point where it's so lost to us in terms of our education of our children and, and the way our culture is structured, and the way whatever's happened to, you know, all the different elements of our culture that were so fractured that we can't pull it back together again. You know, I don't know. Well, I you know, and so that's where, you know, the the history of the 60s gets interesting because, you know, trying to follow Robert Putnam, Peter Thiel, you know, Peter Thiel's line about progress, you know, progress, you know, 1969 stalled and my conversation with burn power, where, you know, you have Woodstock, and then the fire festival, and, and something, you know, we reached a point at which Martin Luther King Jr. What would the 70s have done to him? Would the 70s be the 70s if he hadn't been assassinated? So you know, there's a there's a resonance between Lincoln's assassinated and Martin Luther King Jr.'s assassination, because in many ways, a number of years ago, I read a terrific biography of Malcolm X. And it's very interesting, again, to to up the resolution during the civil rights movement, because many of these issues were very much in play. And we're still playing with the same issues. You know, suddenly, when when white supremacy becomes the defining label for all of American history since what six was it 1619? Um, that meant that Barack Obama was a white supremacist president? That sounds kind of not right. But, you know, so we've seen the changing of a guard. And we're and so then when I when I watch Eric Weinstein, you know, who, of course, works for Peter Thiel. And I didn't really understand Eric until I started listening to some teal. And then I read Dowlfitt's book on decadence. And it's like, okay, this is coming together. Eric born in the mid 60s is part of these tweeners like me, who were born in the 60s, not the 50s or the 40s, born in the 60s. And that's me as well. Yeah, yeah. And Jordan Peterson, too. Yeah. And where we, we saw enough of, we saw enough of that post World War Two generation and that culture. And we also got a pretty good look at the 70s in our youth. And it was it was it was problematic. Yeah. And then and then the 80s, you know, new day in America and the rise of the religious right and the evangelical sort of coming to the fore, you know, putnam makes the point that we've sort of been oscillating since then. And so then when you get to Jordan Peterson, and then Eric Weinstein, I mean, one of the things that I talked about with Jonathan Peugeot is that since Jordan kind of fell out of the middle, Ben Shapiro and Eric Weinstein can't find each other. Jordan was sort of the the guy in the middle that could make the exchange work. You know, Shapiro can't talk. Well, he's just poisoned because of his political activism. But you know, so there they are in the middle. And it was Peterson who kind of came together and the well, now the circuit was connected. And we were beginning to see, oh, maybe there's, you know, maybe we can actually get some work done, working on recognizing the problems of the frame, and saying, how can we not lose the scientific vision and still incorporate consciousness and narrative and tell us and all these missing pieces? And maybe, no, you at some point, I think you've talked about this, but and Tom Holland may fit into this a little bit in that what would be very interesting would be for Weinstein to sit down with a serious historian. And is there a serious historian? And I'm not, you know, Tom may be that person. But that would be an interesting whole category to come to the fore is a historical perspective, because that's one of the things that's really kind of when you listen to that, it's very missing. They gesture at it, but they are themselves these kind of technocratic economists, aren't they? Is that what they are? Form of the, you know, kind of these idea based analysis of what it's kind of, it's kind of diachronic, it's kind of, you know, not temporally, it's not narrating up on you, maybe. Yeah, yeah, I think I got, it's, it's, no, I think you're exactly right. And this, you know, Peterson is a psychologist. You know, Eric is a mathematician. Yeah, you Sam Harris is really a celebrity atheist. That's his job. Brett is a biologist. And, and Tom Holland is a novelist historian or a historical novelist. Popularizer of history. Yeah. Yes. So, you know, it's, they need and that's partly why, you know, I like bringing in George Marsden, who of course is he was a history professor of mine, actually at Calvin College. I got a chance to take one course with him. But he has done, he has done a lot of the history of this because he's both focused on, let's say, I mean, he wrote a, you know, one of the most important biographies of Jonathan Edwards, but then also more of his recent things about history of evangelicals and fundamentalists and all of that. He doesn't necessarily get at the philosophical stuff so much. But I was very excited that, you know, so Tom, he's working on a project of translating, I think it's Suetonius. And then he's got another project, but then the project he really wants to get at is in fact, the history of the counterculture and do that in line with dominion. Because right there, I mean, you know, if you listen to Peter Thiel, he'll say that, you know, our civilization reached its peak in 1969 with the moon landing. And in a sense, you know, you might, we might ask, did we fly too high? Because since then, it's been decadence. And, and we haven't, well, what exactly did we lose? Well, what was, what was the counterculture was, the counterculture was certainly trying to address the corruptions of their fathers. That's clear. What they, what they, what they struggled with was, well, they struggled with the harder project, which is building it yourself. And, and whereas the, you know, the, the silent generation, and then the generation that the babies of the 1920s, while they, you know, were born into the Great Depression, fought the Second World War, faced the threat of nuclear annihilation. And, you know, we're able to build something yet. And in a sense, they had no other choice but to, by virtue of their circumstance. Jonathan Peugeot said something very interesting. He said, you know, in some ways, Christians haven't, at least Christians in the English language world, mean it's been Lewis and Tolkien, that have sort of been carrying things. And now the poet T.S. Eliot, the sort of carrying things. And, you know, we're at a point now where, you know, can we really talk about whether or not the Beatles music was good? Um, Bob Dylan. So Bob Dylan has his Christian phase. Kanye's is hat Kanye is having his now. But there was something insufficient in the Christian offerings, the church offerings on the menu, that made Bob Dylan and many others like him not find a place to settle. And we're still in that. And we see that with Jordan Peterson, because where could Jordan have done what he did from the church? You know, Bishop Baron is about as capable as anyone out there in terms of the philosophical chops and the eloquence and, you know, history, maybe, yeah, the history as well. But Jordan Peterson did something that Bishop Baron couldn't do. And part of that is because of the religiosity polarization that Putnam notes. But we're in this strange time when none of these tags function as they should. Whereas at least with some rationality, when John F. Kennedy ran for president, Catholics understood what Catholics were, even though, of course, their leader was a sex addict who didn't, you know, always the case. Yeah, that's my personal lament about all things. I perhaps am not as negative as maybe I sound though. I mean, we don't sound negative. No? Good. Good. I have that hope that the tradition will continue. I mean, there's always the idea that forgetting of the past is just one more phase in the way in which we incorporate the past. And so there'll be another move down the road. And so maybe that's where we're headed. Well, I am optimistic, not only because I'm a confessional Christian, and I believe in the resurrection and the life of the age to come, but also because, you know, so that my Sunday sermon and then the Monday video was on like stories of old. I like that. And so here he's, you know, well, here's the assumed reality, which of course is chaotic, and there's no purpose and, you know, completely buys it. But all of his tools are inherited from Christianity. And at some point, you know, you're banging away trying to destroy religion at some point, the hammer, which is the most solid thing you have will turn to you and say, did you ever wonder where the hardness comes from that you use to smash what you think is the problem? Yeah, he's gonna be a problem for me. This guy, this guy's, he's great. You're right. He's got lots of good production values. But his all his underlying message is, it doesn't doesn't work for me least. And his I don't know if you saw the revenant. He did a analysis of revenant. He just got it pretty much wrong. I think Logos made Flesh's got a better, you know, kind of interpreted framework than that guy does. But he'll be interesting to watch. I think that third video is going to be very interesting to see. Well, I hope it's interesting, because that would mean that it's not what I expect it to be. Right, which will be well, even though, even though you can't, even though there is no real purpose or hope, you can pretend like there is, and that will be enough. And I think, ironically, what he's doing is exactly what destiny and rationality rules say Jordan Peterson is doing. At some point, people are going to say, Oh, okay, well, thank you very much. I am going to live in that world. I will be a story. And I believe in a hero. And I don't really frankly, we don't have a choice. Yes. I mean, we own we own our own stories. This is Kirk Guard all over again. For me, it's like we own our own stories. There isn't any getting out of that. You know, and yes, we can't see the end. But the point of that is to see however it plays out as substantial as meaningful. And that is certainly possible. That is to say, you know, we know how it ends. He outlines that nicely. We know how it ends. And the question is not how it ends. But how you interpret how it ends. Yeah, yeah. And, and as I start, as I said a while ago, it's an it's an aesthetic choice, how you see it. It's a choice of taste or choice of, of noticing to be platonic about it, seeing the good, and being able to discriminate and have wisdom to see the good in what we know is our circumstance. That's right. But it's but it's that last little addition that you make that that because you imagine that when you're seeing the good you're seeing through the icon into the good. And, and and whereas he will come back, I suspect, and say, well, you'll know that it's only the facade of good, but that will be good enough. And that's exactly where Lewis says, but why would you stop there? I mean, that's, that's just, it's just foolishness because, and you have the argument of desire that why would you have such tastes if in fact, there really weren't. And to me, it lines up with the, the ontological argument that seems to convince no one, but we can't dismiss it because what it would be a far sadder world if I would think that I'm just going to give people these stories because it gives them a feeling of meaning. Well, and then you back to Sam Harris that, well, it doesn't really work if you don't really believe it. Yeah, that's right. This gets me to James K. Smith. I read because you were talking about this with Julie, and I read the recent book of his. Oh, did you? Yeah, he evokes Camus and the myth of Sisyphus. And I'm thinking, you know, Camus, you just, I get the myth of Sisyphus. I can see that. It's a very profound thing, except it turns out he's first a young man, and then he's growing to be an old man. He's not just rolling the thing up. I mean, infinite can be, you can glance the infinite, but we don't live there. And we have lots of things that we engage in, in that journey that, that is not rolling the stone up the hill repeatedly, because each time it's different. And at one point, we're a young man. At the next point, we're getting married. And the next point, we have a child. At the next point, that child is growing up. It's not Sisyphus. Yes. And, and that's where the meaning is. And you can, you can, you can sit there at your French cafe smoking cigarettes, seeing how that day was the same as the prior. But at some point, you're not going to make it. At some point, something's going to be different. You know, so anyway, that I Julian is, you know, a lot of the characters you've collected are, are, are, are great to listen to. But Julian, Julian's got a little, a little special kind of, well, he does. And you know, and again, why? Because, you know, not to take anything away from Julian as an individual, but Julian is a product of his community. He was formed in that. He's, you know, he's, he's living the life that has been cultivated, been cultivated by centuries of Christian thought, Christian piety, Christian discipline. And so again, not to take away from anything, you know, Julian's biological intelligence, but Julian is such a welcome presence on this stage, partly because here in the year 2020, such people are so hard to find. Yeah. And yeah, that's a sad thing. Yeah, that's true. And but he comes up with some little jewels in there every time. But that Sisyphus image though, really goes to that question of choice, because you certainly can choose to see it like Sisyphus. You can sit there and look at it that way. Yeah. It, you know, you can do that. It's a choice that you can make. But you don't have to make that choice. You can make another choice. Yeah. Yeah. Anyway. Anyway. Well, this has been as always, as always wonderful. I, you know, part of the reason I, I'm in such a dilemma, because on one hand, by discipline, I keep a certain rando channel open, so I can always get people I don't expect. And of course, you came into my life via that channel. But yeah, you always bring me such, such good stuff and such helpful stuff. So, you know, the channel is always open to you, Jim. And I think you know that. But I deeply, go ahead. I like to spend time in your steeped in your your kind of storyline. And it brings things up and I can let it develop for an extended period of time. And then we'll show up again somewhere down the road. That's great. It's great fun. I enjoy it a lot. That's, as I said before, it's, it's, it's something I don't have elsewhere in my life as much as I would like. And this is, this is my, this is my group. And everybody, everybody populates this, this little environment that I love. So, well, thank you, Jim. And, you know, take care with this Coronavirus. And you too, you too. And may God bless your work and your family and Lord willing, we will talk again. Thank you. Thank you. You too. All right. Bye bye. Bye bye.