https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tbQE4YuquQI

 Sorry about that. Dang it, you're recording now I'm not going to say what I was going to say. Oh, you should definitely say what you were going to say. No, I'll save that for after the recording. Okay. Okay. Well, we're here just critiquing Luke's look this morning. So I'm talking about the state of counties in California, how California is really at least three states. There's Southern California, there's the Bay Area of which Sacramento is increasingly an extension and there's all rural California. So it's there. It's the rural counties are all opening up. And it'll be very interesting because a lot of these rural lot of the the suburbs of Sacramento are are now in these rural counties. So things are going to be opening up out there are people from Sacramento going to travel there to buy in the stores. We don't really know. I had a conversation yesterday and a friend who his family is from Iowa and said that his parents church had been open for two weeks and they usually have about 700 in worship and they've had about 100 over the last two weeks. So even if you open up, it doesn't mean that people will come. But yeah, it's kind of interesting. It's just because I don't know, it's I wonder what the whole thing with is what will happen. I think of that one because because Joker video where he does the Heath Ledger Joker of just kind of walking through the symbolism of that. And I wonder if what this whole covid thing will do with how we think of borders and and which borders matter and which rules matter. I don't know. It'll be it'll be interesting to see if it. I don't know if it manifests that we get more local autonomy and borders and authority and structures, because that's the thing. I mean, it's hard to treat California as if it's all. The same thing. And Southern California has sort of become an epicenter. The Bay in Sacramento Sacramento's numbers are very low. What's what's going on in Texas? I think the numbers have started to go up a little bit, at least in the in the Dallas area since we've reopened. But I think that's to be expected as you have more people getting together. I think the numbers are going to go up. What does reopen look like in the Dallas area? I have not been paying very close attention to it, but I think the guidelines are businesses are only supposed to operate at 25 percent capacity. I think that was the first stage. We're still in the first stage. And then I think it's gatherings of no larger than 10. But that's as much as I know. I've perhaps it's my privilege, but I've been trying to stay away from away from news, staying home and whenever I get close to people out in the public, you know, I will go out and wear a mask, you know, we'll go out and grab some food from time to time. But it's always like take out or through the definitely through the drive through. So that's about as much as I know. There are people who are more informed than I'm sure could give you corrections to what I said. But that's how I understand it. Churches open closed? Still closed. The people in my family that work in churches, I'll just leave it at that. They are going in and they are doing live broadcasts on Sunday of their worship service. They are socially distancing as they're doing their production, though. So nobody's getting closer than six feet to each other, which is an interesting dance. But yeah, I have found it to be much more. I like it better whenever I know that it's a live broadcast versus a canned recording. And then I sit down on a Sunday and it's just like, oh, so you guys were actually doing this on Thursday. And yeah, I'm sitting here with a live audience, but, you know, it's like I'm watching Paul and John Verveckis premiere. It's not actually happening right now. The only interaction that can happen is here in the comments. And, you know, I don't know, there's just something that seems more meaningful or I like it better in some way whenever it's a live broadcast. I also understand that it's just not practical for some churches to be able to do that because they don't have the technologies in place or it's just too foreign. It's not something that they've practiced. And the one that I'm talking about, you know, they did it a little bit before all of this started, but it's just a lot of learning on the fly, too. And they're fortunate where they have some volunteers that are in their congregation who are very skilled at this. So they could jump right in and knew exactly how to help the clerical staff. Clerical? I don't know if that's the right way to say it. To help the pastors and the ministers along with things that, you know, they're not experts in so that they can do the things that they're trained to do. If we started doing, you know, if we got Rick and Pete and Nina in on Sunday mornings, if some of our other people heard that we were in the building on Sunday morning, they'd be hammering on the door to let us in, to let them in. And then it's like, do we lock these people out? I mean, that's part of the reality that- They're pounding on the door of the Ark. Well, that's right. You know, you guys are doing worship and I can't watch. I don't have broadband anyway. Why don't you just let me in? Yeah. I had a Zoom call yesterday with a bunch of the pastors from our CRCs in the region and this question of, okay, if we reopen and there's social distancing, you know, are we going to kneecap 80 year olds to keep them from hugging the other 80 year olds? I'm not. Am I going to wrestle them to the floor and make them wear a mask? No. So, I mean, these are- that's the kind of questions that we're dealing with in terms of the practicalities of what to come next. So what's going on in Minnesota? Yeah, I don't know. Can we title this kneecap 80 year olds? I'll look into it. Now, if we go that route and I end up- if we do a dual release of this again, Paul, and I end up making a thumbnail for it, I can't promise what kind of things might end up in those pictures. Oh, man. Sometimes- you said something in a recent video where I was just like, oh, man, it's so great. I'll have to remember. It'll come to me what the line was. Just, I didn't expect it. It was wonderful. Yeah, Minnesota. I think the shelter at home is supposed to stop Monday. But I don't- but like you were saying, I don't know how that- I don't think it will really change anything because I think you still are going to have large gatherings and there's still some prohibitions on church meetings and things like that. And businesses are going to do kind of soft opens with limited amounts of people that can go in the stores, different things. Restaurants will still be closed. Yeah, I don't know. And I'm not, you know, speaking Jeff's privilege, I'm also not one to ask because I don't follow any of that. Like if someone- unless you mention it or like Rogan maybe mentions it or the Discord is talking about it, I don't know what's going on besides what I can see in my neighborhood or what my neighbors talk about. And that just usually devolves into wearing masks and conservatives denying that COVID exists and how terrible Trump is. So- Conservatives are complaining about Trump? No, no, no, no, no. I mean, I live in Minneapolis proper. There aren't- there's like- there's a few conservatives here. You can tell they usually have like- they're driving pickups covered in Trump stickers. But then everyone else is not- is very- I saw some girl on a run that said like, oh man, I almost stopped and talked to her because my low politeness, but it said like voting is my superpower. And I just wanted to be like, oh man, that's like- if you could just write a little axiom that I could just be like, this is the archetype of kind of what's wrong with the world. Like, there it is. So outside of that, I don't know. There's not- it's an interesting- it's an interesting world. It doesn't look that much different to me, except that I'm just- I'm now like a full-time IT person for my children, except for right now. They're supposed to be- so my wife is working and they're here. So we'll see how good they behave during this. Well, we didn't- we didn't- we didn't gather today to talk about COVID. I'm not exactly sure what we're talking about, so I'll let you guys- let you guys start. Well, I wanted- I can't remember what the impetus was. I was listening to something that you said and I wanted to talk about- I wanted to talk about propositional truth because I still think this is a- of the- the Verveki's four P's have become jargon in this little corner. And I talk about these things. We listen to you and I talk about these things with Jeff and some of the other people and it comes up in the Discord. And I was saying something- I sent a big- a couple long audios to Jeff and some other people and I was like, I still don't feel like I'm being clear on this or people understand what I was saying. And then Jeff responded with- and this was very- my Enneagram 4 was just overwhelmed with affection for Jeff because Jeff responded and he's like, I think this is what you're saying. And I was just like, yes, yes, that's what I'm saying. Thank God. Thank the Lord. So- so Jeff is a little bit of my- I brought Jeff in because I think- He translates through tongues? Yeah, he can translate my tongues and- We should- I should comment that in last Friday's Discord chat, the first question out of the box was about speaking in tongues. And was it- was it- was it Luke that you said that Jeff is your tongue strand? Luke is the one who speaks in tongues and Jeff does the interpretation? Was it this pair or was there another pair that claimed that? I think I said that. I think I said a little bit like how Luke talks and I'll interpret what he says. Yeah, it's- it works well that way though because the- the Cliff Notes version, I think, and what Jeff had said of what really struck him is the way that I had framed it. There's a- there's a few different, I think, supporting ways to think about it that I think help, but- but it's essentially the idea that propositional- propositional knowledge is- I would put almost in a separate category and maybe with perspectival in that I think propositional knowledge is- is potential knowledge and I wouldn't put it on the same level as participatory or procedural because those are- those are by necessity enacted. Those are by necessity act as if knowledge and propositional is not. And I think that's really, really important because I think- I think what is happening in the West with- not only in religious communities, not only in explicitly religious communities, but also irreligious communities, also social justice warriors, the whole phenomenon of identitarianism, I think, comes out of a- a misunderstanding and a misuse of what propositions and propositional knowledge is. So- Do you have an interpretation, Jeff? Well, actually, what I wanted to do first was just see if Paul, you could give like a- a very quick summary of what propositional knowledge is in the way that Vervecki frames it. All right. I was listening. What talk was Vervecki doing? Oh, he- he- in his- I- someone had noted on Twitter, which was very interesting, a little scary, had noted, Paul, you haven't listened to the Vervecki-Migilchrist talk on rebel wisdom yet. And I thought, no, I hadn't. And so I started listening to it. And- and right at the beginning, about, you know, four or five minutes into that conversation, John gives a nice summary articulation of his four Ps. A part of the challenge with John in his Awakening from the Meaning Crisis series is that it's so expansive that sometimes you- you really want the thumbnail versions of this. So- so proposition, I think propositional truth is, and has become in this conversation, sort of the- the credo belief level, in some cases, scapegoat or even whipping boy of- of Christendom's confessional moments, that what- what we're- what- and it makes perfect sense if you think about modernity and then post-modernity, what we're skeptical of and therefore attacking are the propositional statements of- of Christendom that Christianity has used, in fact, to create identity and community. So the Apostles' Creed, so the- the- one of the churches that we- we met in- in Tucson, the village, the church of my- my friend Rod, they're- they're only- they're- they're not technically a Christian Reformed Church, they're an independent church, and their only credo is the Apostles' Creed, and that gives them kind of a, you know, simple- fairly simplistic, it doesn't have all the kinds of things you'll find in, let's say, especially the canons of Dor. So it's I believe this, I believe that, I believe this, I believe that. Now it's tempting to look at these propositions as very modernistic, and there's- there's a real relationship between propositional knowledge and modernism, but obviously these things took on a tremendous amount of power and life very early on. The Apostles' Creed isn't in the Bible, but we don't actually know when it first arose, we just know it arose very, very early, and that's why we're so- so- so- so- so- so- so- so- so- so- so- so- so- so- early, and this kind of propositional approach to Christianity came about very early, in fact, even in the period of- of- of the Apostles in Scripture with something as Jesus is Lord, because there's a- there's a credo propositional statement which is obviously riffing on Caesar and- and so propositional truth and propositional knowledge has- and that formulation of knowledge has been around a very long time. What's interesting in the- the Verbecky-Migilchrist conversation, because that conversation is very interesting on this subject, because Migilchrist's whole project asserts that this, you know, the- the propositional- the propositional knowledge is really a very left-brained thing, that the left brain can't see what the right brain can see, but the right brain can't say what the left brain can say, and so propositional knowledge is a very left-brained thing, and Migilchrist's complaint is that this left-brainism has sort of taken over the world, and that's- that's not exactly- that's not exactly good for us, so I probably completely failed Luke's or Jeff's question, which is a little summary. Propositional stuff is Jesus is Lord, I believe in God the Father, Donald Trump is a Republican, Joe Biden is a Roman Catholic, you know, things like this. It's an abstracted truth. Yes, and it's- it's- it's propositional, and Verbecky talks about this well, it's- it wasn't actually Verbecky, it was someone in the Discord server who said, you know, or it might have been- I think it was Mary that said, you know, it's- it's- it's- it's sort of third person-ish. It's out here apart from us, and that's what separates it from the procedural, which is things that we do, the perspectival, which is sort of the- the I and the thou, and the participatory, which is sort of the we. In that sense, it's the- it's the third person of- it's not first person, it's not second person, that's, you know, that's really relational. It's the third person, it's the thing that's out there, and of course modernism, especially trying to approximate this monarchical vision, attempts to say, and Sam Harris and- and that approach to knowledge basically says that's the only true knowledge we have is propositional knowledge. None of the other kinds of knowledge really matters. All other knowledge- Go ahead. And in an objectivist way, they deny the perspectival part of it. Yes, yes. And- So like the McGilchrist thing is huge, I think, because that's one of- if I had three supporting buttresses for trying to explain what I mean about propositional as potential, and really putting in a different category, because that's where this goes off the rails, I think. Most people just sit here and have dialogue staying almost exclusively in the arena of the propositional, and they think that's the whole arena. And that's- and then you get into like excluding people, de-platforming people, pushing people out of the bound- you bind and blind around mere propositions, and that is, you've completely misunderstood the whole ballgame. Because it's- and that's the lopsided left brain that McGilchrist has talked about. He's one of the pieces that I would bring in, and then I have- so then just to lay out my other two pieces, and then we can go into them in whatever depth you want, would be, I think, one of the other ones is one of the things that really struck me was JP- is it Marceau? Is that how you say his name? In his conversation with Peugeot, he talked about- they talked about the violence and the grace of eating food, and the give and take of that whole phenomenon of when you eat food, you chew it up, it goes down in your stomach, and you- but like, in order to have true nourishment, in order for the food to do what it's supposed to, in order for the food to act as if what food is for you, not only do you have to chew it- not only do you have to put it in your hand, put it in your mouth, chew it up, swallow it down, you have to fully digest it so that it becomes part of you. We- we behave in such a way- I call that eucharistic knowledge. Knowledge needs to- the proposition can't just be something that you use in your hand. It can't just be something that you use as a label and throw out there, like, because that's just potential. It- it's meaningless until you- until you do it. So that's one of the other pieces I would bring in, and then- and I don't know, these are too big. The other- the other one is that I- I think I can explain, at least from my perspective, or at least throw out a thesis of- of how I think the lopsided left brain phenomenon happened and how propositional- propositional objectivist knowledge through modernity, through the evolution of consciousness in kind of a barfieldian way, I think I can explain how that happened through the development of the self and the inner life and all that kind of stuff, if you want to go down that route too. I just wanted to throw in here, I mean, I think one of the things that led to Luke wanting to have this conversation with you, Paul, and wanting to pull me into it was the fact that, you know, after he had shared some ideas, I just- I just gave him a response back of what in there kind of resonated with me, and I think this first part that I'm about to talk about ties together. I'm- I'm kind of just recounting the little audio message that I left for you, Luke, but it started off with me referencing a conversation that John Verbecky posted on his channel between him and Tyler from the Discord. Oh, yep. Yep. I guess to watch that, Paul. I did watch that. That was a good conversation. In that conversation, they talked about conversations between people and how there's some kind of quality in particular to the types of conversations that we've been having on the Discord and we've been having on this corner of this corner of this corner of the internet, and how people can be involved in the conversation as long as they're trying to keep the conversation going, and I think they said this was in like a Socratic type way, but just trying to keep the conversation going and that the- the point of it was not to try to work with the conversation, and I'm not necessarily trying to convince the other person that the proposition that you're making is true and to get them to agree with that proposition, but rather the thing that they said that they were noticing was that the two people just by virtue of being involved in a conversation that you want to keep going gets you to a place that you could not have gotten on your own. It may be you coming to the conclusion that the propositions that you're in a locker was making ends up being something that you agree with. It may be that you were totally unconvinced and you never are convinced of those propositions, but you had some other kind of revelation that came as a result of having that conversation. You may have seen it as connected. It may have been connected to the conversation that you were making, but you never were convinced that it was connected to the conversation that you were making. You may have seen it as connected. It may have been completely unrelated, but the point being that I really enjoyed from their conversation is I have had those experiences where you- where you reach a place you feel like, no, there's no way I could have gotten here without this other person, and wow, I didn't even realize that I could have gotten to this place as a result of that conversation, but somehow I did. I think that's a good point to look about as far as what stood out to me that he has said over and over and over again, but it just- I don't know. It never stuck in my mind until I heard it probably the 50th time, and so maybe people will appreciate this, maybe not, but I encourage Luke that because of my experience, yes, just keep saying the same things over again and people may eventually hear it. Take that, Andreas. But his point that the propositional is potential. It is an abstraction. It's almost a theorization of here's what I will do when faced with this situation because I know what I propositionally believe about it, right? And I've had too many experiences in my life where I thought I knew what I was going to do if I ever faced generic situation, and then when it gets dropped on me, when I didn't recognize, oh my gosh, I am just now being thrown into this situation, particularly that I had a very general conception of what I was going to do and who I was and how I was going to embody those beliefs, and I did something completely different. And so what I got out of this whole thinking about what Luke was proposing is we don't really know what's real until trials test and reveal, and that was accidentally a rhyme, but I somehow came up with it. It's good though. It's good. Yeah, we don't know what's real about ourselves, and these conversations that we're having, I think they have to be, I think the primary purpose of these conversations that we have have to be about building relationships between the participants or else for the most part, they're not really producing any fruit. They won't work because it'll just, if you're not really, you ultimately won't be able to, you actually won't be able to follow JP's, Jordan Peterson's, JBP's rule number nine, and assuming the person you talk to may know something you don't, or like Eric Weinstein's island rules that I like to bring up very often, you won't be able to do those things if you live in the lopsided left brain where you live in this very dualistic right and wrong, and you equate that to your map, you equate that to your left brain understanding your model, and all models are false, some are useful, you'll never actually be able to engage that person in a good faith conversation because you will be subconsciously in a mode of winning all the time because you're fighting for some kind of objectivist truth that you think that you see rather than the way that I like to describe it, and this is why I say this is an act as if conversational Trinitarianism, because you have an I and you have a thou and you have a bridge, that's what I think the diologos and what they were talking about is, is that you have some unknown, unrepresented, unapproachable truth, like the religio, Jordan Peterson out here, that you tap into and you do that, and through the logos, through this interaction between the two, you tap into that spirit in a way that you can't do in your isolated bubble. That was all really good, I'm really glad we got it recorded from both of you. Yeah, let's, and we're not going to do knee-copping granny, we're going to do, you know, we don't know what's real until trials and tests reveal, that's a good title. It's a pastor. It preaches, it preaches. No, this is all really, really good and it pulls just a lot of things together. It is interesting to me, the first, second, and third person, so this thing sort of, so Luke brought in the Trinitarian idea, Jeff, I think really brought in the, the other piece, Fleshed It Out, with your little story about, our imagination, Well, I think it's helpful to go way back to Plato, perhaps, and understand why he, ironically, had such fear and trepidation about written, the written word, that in a sense, the written word is a very third person thing, and part of the reason, you know, so I was listening to the McGill-Christ-Vervecky conversation, and thinking about the fact that part of the reason we tend to be so lopsided in this perspective is because we have discovered the power of the propositional, and I think the reproducibility of the propositional. So this morning, I was, so I was mentioning to Luke that my, I'm starting to get now a routine for my new pandemic reality, and usually the first movement of the day, the early morning, before I start talking to people or listening to anything, is usually sermon work or video PowerPoint work, and so I was working on my sermon for Sunday, and I'm using the, it was posted on the Discord, the, like, stories of old, the last two videos where he's saying stories are not reality, and heroes, you know, are not what you think they are, and so in my sermon on 1 Peter 3, really 2 and 3, I sort of deconstruct those two videos, and the roots of, you know, what was so evident to me, and I'll probably do a video about this next week, maybe my Monday video will be about this, the, when you watch those two videos and you understand Christianity, you know why the developmental path that he says, that he, that he shows basically ends up why it does, it's because of Christianity, because Christianity is really exemplified, as Jordan Peterson noted, the hero's journey, and as C.S. Lewis and Tolkien noted, here you have the myth becoming life, the myth becoming flesh, and then that myth becoming flesh then gets into every man, so the hapless disciples themselves can become the heroes of the Book of Acts and the heroes of the New Testament, let's say, and then women and people of other, you know, races, they then become heroes in the story, and so what we see is that the propositions, Caesar is Lord, Jesus is Lord, these things are very easy for us to do, and they're also very, they can be universalized fairly quickly, and they can, because they can be appropriated so well, but what in a sense we do with film, and with story, and with other things, is that we take the proposition and we try to feed the other layers with it, and I think that's exactly what Jeff just noted that this vision he had in his mind, you know, the other P's were certainly lurking in there, but it was sort of propositional, but once you, once it actually becomes procedural and in real life participatory, well that, the falsely theoretical of the propositional has to give way, but then new propositions, because, you know, we don't know what is real until trials and tests reveal, there's a propositional line right there, and so there's always this dynamic between the four P's, and that's why, you know, I hear a lot of complaining and critiquing and criticizing the propositional, but that's why I keep bringing back into the conversation, but we're not going to get rid of it, just like we're not going to get rid of the third person in the English language, and what's so interesting to bring this back into Jordan Peterson land is that it's the third person pronouns that sparked the fight around C16. People, and it's sort of the third person, it's the interaction between the third person pronouns and the first and second person world. How dare you mislabel me with that third person pronoun, but they haven't, you know, even though people are using they in the singular, I've heard no one demand that they use, I've seen no one start using the we for themselves, or the us, well the us, you know, very quickly joins with the second person, because you is sort of partly third person already, as opposed to us, so you know, it's very interesting how even something as simple as first, second, third person in our language, now what's interesting is now you can map this onto dimensions, now then you look at say fourth dimension, which is of course time, then you pull that into the mix, and it gets really interesting and fun, so I don't know if I've made anything clear or just rambled on you poor hapless souls who asked for this. Thinking about the, but let me just finish by saying I really like your ideas third person and proposition of potential, I think there's a lot of really cool potential in that observation. Well, my concern is that I essentially think, so what identitarianism is, and then the phenomenon of just excluding and dividing and having tribal warfare around labels is to stop at the propositional level. It's not necessarily about your behavior or what you do, it's just like, and I mean there's there's a there's many many illustrations about that, it could be like, it doesn't matter if you love, it's just like, and this what's what leads into people not being open to saying what they really think, because that's a very common occurrence everywhere, I mean in this community it's a common occurrence, it's a common occurrence in the tribal community, and I think that's in political circles is people don't want to say they said something, because like even if, for example, like even if I said to my neighbors, some of my neighbors, like something as seemingly reasonable as like I don't think Trump is the anti-Christ, you know, like that could just like shut down a wall, like I could just be dead to them, but like that's not, that's the problem, like shutting things down at that kind of propositional level and not trying to not entering into the Eucharistic knowledge, the testing and the trials of like, what do I mean by that long-form conversation, like don't Kathy Newman me, essentially is what I'm trying to say, but I think that's what happens around the ideas of propositions, that's what happens with like Sam and Unitarians, it's just like Sam is a Unitarian, boom, door closed, I will not talk to you, you know, you're a heretic, boom. The representations, you know, we're associating a lot of meaning, a lot of preconceptions with the Trump is not the anti-Christ, Sam is a Unitarian, part of that is what are the worst things that I can think of that this person probably means by that, that just comes rushing to our minds and another dynamic of that I think is we go into quarantine mode, it's like well I'm not going to get infected by this, you know, what if I start letting Sam talk to me and I start turning into a Unitarian? Yeah, it's the disgust impulse that we talked about with hate, which is really a conservative impulse, right, it's the keep the outside out and this is something Jeff and I talked about and Jeff was bringing up is that the Jordan Peterson descriptions of like the hero and what's outside the wall and this is, so this feeds both points because Paul, what you're saying is propositions are good, like the walls are good, there's a lot of things out there that will kill you, like it's a bad thing, but there's also the thing out there that you will bring in that will revivify the city and but like when you treat propositions though as just hard walls and not semi-permeable membranes like a cell, the cell dies and so you can't treat propositions that way, you and I guess that's my argument because this is what people often come back to me in retort is just like you don't like propositions, there you just used a proposition, you're busted, you know, and it's like no, it's not what I'm talking about or there's like Eastern Orthodox have propositions, sure, yeah, got it, I understand, but so like they are fine, you just, you have to, but you have to treat them for what they are and you can't ever I think get confused that and this is why I love McGilchrist in the conversation so much the map is not the territory and I think this is the problem is that I just don't, this is where it becomes like where I'll spiritualize it and get like really, this is why I talk about things like egoic intellect and principalities is that this is a phenomenon that I've experienced a lot, there are a lot of people who I think, who I've talked to, there's a number of people that I've talked to who I think begin to understand what I'm saying with all this propositionally but it doesn't stop them from acting in a way that's still along the lines of what I'm saying, does that make sense? So like they'll understand propositionally the danger of treating propositions that way but it doesn't change their behavior at the procedural and the participatory level, this is why I think the Bible talks so much about like with testing and fruit and you know and the whole book of James, you know the James Paul split, you know you say you have faith by this, I'll show you my faith by what I do and I think what's so hard about that because this gets in the evolution of consciousness stuff is that and NT Wright has really pithy quotes about this like which I can't remember off the top of my head because they're too good but like I think we very often do anachronistically read the Bible with modern lenses and but NT Wright says something like we need to stop asking 15th century questions with 21 century lenses and start asking 21 century questions with I don't know something like that. Probably first century lenses I mean yeah because he's primarily a historian. Yeah. The, I'm gonna go back to the first, second and third person in speech and make the observation of one thing I learned in dealing with interpersonal conflict that if a relationship has gotten so bruised and therefore tender because when you get a really bad bruise or a really bad burn, the thing is it's enormously tender. You can almost not do anything. One of the things I very quickly learned was the second and third, the second and third persons get, second and third person language in the middle of trying to have a dialogue with a person with whom you are having significant conflict. The second and third persons are almost places you can't go. So anytime you say you in a conflict, you're imposing your reality on me. Anytime you say even something third person, it's risky because you, the person with whom I'm having conflict, is now in a sense distilling reality propositionally and about the only about the only thing you have left is the first person. I this, I that and don't sneak second and third person into the first. I feel that, you know, so just read all kinds of conflict and marriage books and you know you'll get tons of this stuff. Yet at the same time there's in terms of part of growing up and being able to participate in robust, meaningful, productive dialogue is having to properly manage the third person, which means that someone puts up a third person, a third person statement and a propositional statement and okay, so there it is. Let's not get reactive about it either way, either by just absorbing it or by being allergic to it. Just let it live there in the third person. Don't be, you know, don't be afraid of it. Don't bow down and worship it. Just let it be what it is and if you can get to that point, then you can deal with, you know, Trump is not the Antichrist or Antichrist or Sam is a Unitarian and we don't have to freak the heck out because we've had 1500 years of cultural formation that, you know, Servetus comes to mind. So I think that's, I think it's really helpful but at the same time, I mean there's equal and opposite reactions which is to say, well we're going to, we, okay first person, we are going to, this is the first person, we are going to avoid the, we are going to avoid the third person. Okay and it just, you can't build community without the propositional and I think the reason, the reason that propositional statements have become so ubiquitous in church history is because they're so powerful in affording community. Now they're, and I think as we're rightly noting, they can be deeply problematic and Sam's participation and in fact even leadership, I mean when Sam took the Discord off for Lent, you know, you could feel some of the energy, you know, leave the community because all of the stuff that Sam brings in wasn't there and, and well Sam's a, Sam's a heretic, yeah the Discord isn't a church either and, and, and the higher resolution we go into Sam's Unitarianism, the, the more we, you know, that's why I loved his conversation with Brett Sockel is that just like we were talking about with these conversations, it wasn't about winning between them but I think both Sam and Brett came away from that conversation with more than they came into it. They felt blessed by the conversation and I who just simply overheard had the same experience and you know ideally when the thing that we're doing right now in fact that we sort of discovered, ideally when it works, whatever that means for us, is when that happens and I, I think what we're trying to do with this analysis of the four P's and, and the strengths and limitations of each of the P's is, you know, upping the resolution on okay how can we not only theoretically derive rules, that's very propositional, rules about how to have better dialogues but we are practicing it because just like Luke said or just like Jeff said, we have all these, you know, rules about, you know, how to succeed, rules for success. Of all these rules which are propositional, those rules mean nothing until you try them and there's these other aspects of knowledge, the procedural, the participatory, the perspectival, that won't get engaged until I actually have an encounter with the proposition and all four P's come together which is, you know, far closer to a better model of life and, and again I haven't talked about this potential idea because I, you know, but I think that's really key in that and I think it's in that movement that the propositional is potential because, you know, Jeff imagines himself into the, himself into the future, there's the potential and but it isn't until the other three P's are enjoined with that fourth propositional P, that third person thing, that suddenly, well then it happens and well expectations perhaps aren't realized but new things unexpected are discovered and appreciated and then get built into the ongoing movement into more of the propositional. So, and so I think in your observation, Luke, on the propositional being potential, there's always something eschatological about the propositional because again it's sort of timeless in the monarchical vision and so when we say Jesus is Lord, that's an eschatological statement because we look around and we say, well that lordship is in tension with the age of decay right now and, and what we're, what we're leaning into the future potential for is Jesus, is Christ being all in all and so I think that's perhaps some of the reason why the propositional is potential because it is third person, it is away from us. I don't know, that's, that's a whole lot right there. Well what, so a couple things that I want to add in that I was thinking of in this is there's a, there's a Peugeot clip and I can't remember what the title of it is, I'll, I'll find it and tell you guys, but it, but it's of his conversation with Father, Father Stephen Freeman and it's talking about, it's something about like, and Father Freeman said this which I think is a great quote and it's, and you can find the same truth in other places like Dostoevsky says this too, but nobody ever knows anything in general, they only ever know anything in particular they only ever know anything in particular and, and Jeff actually said that like you, you use those, you used a different, like and when you were saying you said like this generic thing but, but you didn't know it until it was tested, until it became particular, until it manifested and what's interesting the kind of epiphany is you were talking, I was thinking about the general in particular, you, you don't know God, you can't know God, you only ever know the particular, the manifestation which is the word, that's all you ever know and then what mediates between those two things is the spirit and that's the transcendent dance piece between all of this and I think this is why, this is why I think all this conversation, I say this a lot and Sam, Sam and I at some point will have a conversation about this, but why I have been, I just see Trinity stuff everywhere and ever since I started talking to Sam I was just like, oh this isn't just like abstracted stuff that doesn't matter, like this is fundamental to the nature of everything, it isn't just like these ideas that these people decided to come up with to map onto something, they were, they were exegeting what is and they just saw it because everything is reflective of God which that makes sense, I mean no matter how, no matter how you want to even define God, define it on a Jordan Peterson lens, you know everything is reflective of that and then it's fractally works out from that and so, and that's what I've just been seeing more and more that in dialogue, that's why I say the short version of that is like in dialogue we need to act as if in a Trinitarian way because if you don't you'll either act, this is why I like the frames that I bring up all the time like monism, dualism and Trinitarianism which is another option, like monism is meaninglessness, everything's illusory, there is no truth, truth is untruth, it's all the same thing, doesn't matter, I don't even really exist, like this is just illusion and eventually it'll all be, no matter what you are, even if you're a materialist, it came from a big bang of nothing and eventually it will collapse back into nothing and this is all just like the C.S. Lewis bottle of fizz just going off, there's no meaning or you can fall into a dualism which is a lopsided left brain, I would say right and wrong, black and white, I'm on team objective, good, fact team which you have the Sam Harris types which are like this is just scientific fact or you have the Ben Shapiro types, facts don't care about your feelings, like these are just facts, it's just the way it is, which is where a lot of the modern discourses around, you have the religious types too which is just like this is just the Bible, this is just facts. It's the modernist apologetic approach. Right, but I would say all of those are acting un-Christianly. Un-Trinitarianly. Same thing to me. But that's the aspect, that's a little higher definition, that's the aspect of Christian that you're saying it fails. Yeah, which is the openness to, and this is why it's not a, I think this is why it's hard for people to wrap their heads around is it's not denying hierarchy, it's not denying better or worse, it's not denying, this is why people don't like have a hard time with Jordan Peterson, it's not denying paths and truth and orientations, it's not denying that but it's saying you don't see it objectively because you can't and that's the iconic vision, everything is a model. Like Verbecky said this in his talk, he was saying you see it as an image instead of a portal but I think it's actually, I would say that I think an icon is an image and a portal, it's both. Right. So I don't know, that was a lot, I don't know how that relates to what you were saying. And the other piece with all this that's tough is that I think we don't, the barfield evolution of consciousness stuff is really important because, and there's a Father John Bayer clip where he's talking about, is God a person, where he brings us up just in passing and it's true but he says it really depends on what you mean, like the whole idea, the whole idea of person developed in Trinitarian theology around the fourth century and even if you look from like the time of Jesus to the time of now, what we think of as a person isn't just clear for how like a first century person would have thought about themselves, the way that they've conceived of themselves and their own person, their identity is very different, the inner self, the self-identifying, all of that stuff is, if you think first century people were thinking that way when they were writing the New Testament, they weren't, that developed all later. I get the impression that they also have this conception that they are actually carrying, they're carrying their ancestors with them in their, day to day is the wrong way of saying it, but just like, I don't know, some of the things I run across in the Old Testament just seem to talk about how they felt like they were a part of Jacob, they felt like they were a part of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they felt like they were with them, they were still those, what we would call individual persons was their identity, was this broader, bigger thing and I feel like in our current age and current culture, we're almost like completely divorced from it, any conception that I notice that we have of being like our ancestors is, oh, I never thought I was going to turn into my dad and it's something we want to avoid, I never thought I was going to turn into my dad and it's something we want to avoid, you know, it seems like more often than not people are saying, oh, I'm turning into my mother, you know, versus like a conception of, no, I'm not turning into my mother, I am a part of my mother and my mother's a part of me and that's a way of being and that's just, it's like the water that I'm swimming in, I wouldn't even know what you're talking about when you're saying, oh, I'm becoming my mother, what do you mean? Well, this gets into, so Jeff and I talked about this, Paul, I'd love your thoughts on it, this gets into like, I don't think we throw, so I can crap on the West a lot and the egoic intellect and this whole, the negative side of this whole development, which I think was an error. And annoy Carl while you're doing it. Right. Right. I don't, I honestly don't know how to not annoy Carl. I agree with that. One of the only things you say that he'll agree with. Yeah. Well, that's because I'm an aspirin. I mean, and but so, so I think about it really in like a, in a spiral dynamics way or what I was saying to Jeff is that in the space trilogy, in the end of Paralandra, Ransom, Lewis, the, well, it's not really Lewis, Lewis is in the trilogy, Ransom is this character who has this vision when he sees like the glorified Eldila and King and Queen of Paralandra and he has this like vision of all these colors interweaving and these things happen and discordant notes and somebody make, it reminded me of the, of the song of the Anur in the Cimmerillian, in the beginning of Tolkien's Cimmerillian, as Melkor came in a discordant note, but then a luvatar re-woven into something more glorious. Yes. This is, I think that's what's happening in a very bar field original, because what Jeff was describing, I think is original participation. We saw, we are the seed of our ancestors, where our ancestors were all one. Our identity is in our, the seed and the genetic and the people. What happened, I think, with the development of the self, which came from Christianity, and then went just haywire and modernity and the enlightenment was we got, we, every man became an island and it was an island of their abstractions in their mind and it was completely disconnected from, from the whole. I think what is going to happen through Protestantism, the enlightenment, all these things is, this is what I was saying to Jeff, my hope, my prayer is, is that in a, in a reintegration of the divorced selves, you will have a reunion of the whole, but in a enlightened, for lack of a better term, an enlightened interpersonal way. So it will be the one among the many. It will be difference, but yet unity. I think this is the vision of the New Testament. And so like the way that I illustrate it, because I think this, the fractal nature of the, of the universe is that like a family is a little microcosm of everything. It's representative of everything. So like with my kids, when they're little kids, they're really part of me. They're really dependent on me. They're actually in me and my wife in a way, and then they come out and they're separate, but they're not really separate. They're really dependent on me. They need you for everything. They don't even really have a sense of identity, but then as they grow and mature, and they need rules, they need rules and structures and models, they have to have that. But then as they grow, they, they have to, they have to come into their own and they have to learn to fly and they have to become separate. And maybe that might be painful and weird for a while, but if they become separate and they're different and they come back and you, and you stay a whole, cohesive whole, but with that, but with that individuality and that difference, that's a more beautiful thing in kind of a Cimmerillian Lewis way. And it's, it's almost like a, oh, there was another, there's another place I was going to go with that, but then I lost it. You're stacking up how many places I have to backtrack over what you've said. Sorry. I might not hit them all. When, when we talked about this earlier, we were talking about how it kind of, it kind of was analogous to a tribal mentality versus, I can't remember what we were juxtaposing that to, but we were essentially talking about how the tribal mentality is just a way of seeing the world where everything outside of the tribe is bad and it will cause harm. And that was, that's very important to keeping a group alive. And then that the hyper individuality becomes the person that leaves the tribe and goes out there and the Jordan Peterson way goes out and slays the dragon and finds the gold and brings the gold back. And I think to connect that to what you were saying is in the spiral dynamic sense of, this is a bad thing if you break from the tribe and you do things that the tribe says is wrong. And so that's like way over here, but as you're spinning out, you bring the good that's back in from that individualism, that hyper individualism that you talked about that we've done with you and that that will, the good things that were in imbued inside of that hyper individualism will swing back around and come in and be integrated with the tribal mindset or the the way of the consciousness, way of viewing what people are versus how they're viewed now in a kind of an individualistic frame. One other conception that I remember Lewis talking about as far as how ancients viewed humanity or maybe how God views humanity is what he was saying, is more instead of seeing humanity as these individual cells, God's view of humanity is more like a tree. Yeah. Well, and Lewis's essay on equality gets into that. And he notes the difference between a bag of widgets, which is modernity's view of, you know, members at CostCo are all the same. They pay their amount. And, and in fact, anti-racism and modernity rightly says, it doesn't shouldn't matter if you're white or black or Asian or Hispanic or male or female. If you're a member in CostCo, you're the same, but membership in the church, a la the apostle Paul is very different because you have the hand and the eye and the nose and the feet. And the eye says to the hand, you know, I have no part of you. And it's like, because you're not like me. No, because it's good that the hand isn't like the eye because you've already got an eye and you need a hand. So it gets into that. But you guys have left me so much. I have to, I want to back, back, go back through now. And that's why I keep notes. Yes, the tribal thing. And, and again, and you'll see this when the rough draft comes out on Saturday, because this gets into the question of the hero's journey, because the hero's journey is the way that tribalism is managed properly, because the tribe rightly says, you know, keep the things out because they're dangerous. The hero says I'll risk the danger for the potential. So I'll leave the tribe, go to the underworld, meet the mentor, find the girl, come back to the tribe transformed and therefore transform the tribe. And it begins a process by which, you know, tribes both maintain their identity as tribes, but yet transcend the limitations of their identity and evolve into new tribes. And, and that then, you know, your family is microcosm of everything is very interesting, because I remember a, a, a conversation about abortion, because of course, the Supreme Court and Roe versus Wade used viability as an argument for abortion. Someone comes along and says, now, wait a minute, let's use a one month old baby. Is that baby viable? And, and this gets very interesting when you look at, you know, studies of adoption, where, you know, maybe the best case scenario where this adopted child is relinquished to another family of origin. And over the last number of years, psychologists looking at that said, well, there's been a, there's been a wound in the separation of the mother, you know, the separation from the mother to the child, there's been a wound there that consciously the adopted child does not, has no conscious awareness of that wound, but that wound is built in. And, and so you very much have the, you know, the, the shalomic whole of the family, which is, you know, which is wounded and torn apart. Now, backtracking through what you had talked about, Lucas, I made notes, you know, one of the things that Protestant, modern Protestant confessionalism reduced people to were bags of confessions. So to be a member of a church, in a sense, you, you open up your confessional propositional credo list and say, these are the things I believe. Okay, now you can be a member of the church. In the Christian Reformed Church, as a youth, you would study the Heideberg Catechism. Say, I believe to the propositions of the Heideberg Catechism, go to the church council, get quizzed on these propositions, and then voila, you are now a member of the church. Now, there's a lot of good that I can be said of that, that we especially know since that form has sort of been passed away, because it was sort of replaced with a much more evangelical form, that on one hand had the propositions, but on the other hand, our heart had to be strangely warmed, and we had to give some experiential evidence for a transformed life. And you see the influence of Methodism, you know, coming on top of the confessional Protestantism. And if you look at church history, you can see, you know, these same things being worked on. And so then you have people who, and you can find it now in the question of same-sex marriage in the church. Okay, so these people have, some of these propositions, or Sam, some of these propositions are not in order. Sam won't say, I believe in the Trinity, but Sam plays the guitar and can lead with worship music, and knows a lot more about, you know, patristic theology than your average, and history than your average pastor, because of his Trinitarian deficiencies. And so, and I think that's right. And then you get into that, you know, where you started with the, not even where you started, because you started a long ways up, but Paralanda and the Silmarillion, an original participation where, you know, a Louvatar takes, you know, here's this discordant strain that comes through into the song, and a Louvatar has to find a way. Now this will get into a lot of patristic conversations that yield eventually the infralapsarian versus superlapsarian controversies of the Protestant confessional world, because how, how are we to think about the relationship between God's intentionality and the discordant Melchor strain that comes into the song? And that's the whole question of the fall. And you can see this, you can see this manifest in interesting conversations, especially between Orthodox who tend to preserve, you know, some of these very ancient patristic ideas, and modern Protestants. And so in that sense, when the Orthodox come to America, which is deeply Protestant, and we remember that North America was founded by Protestant rebels, who there was no place in Europe. So the pilgrims first go to the Netherlands, which is more tolerant than England, but just doesn't feel like home, and so they make the eschatological move out into, you know, the wilderness of New England to found that city on a hill. And of course, those themes get poured into the American mythos and the American story, which in many ways continues to be deconstructed and worked over now. So yeah, you guys, you guys hit on a lot of stuff there. And it's, it was really good. I don't know if, and I, yeah, how do you, and I guess the last comment I made after, after Jeff talked about that the tribes was, you know, again, it's how to get, how to get the both and. And I think you're right that you see that in Revelation with, in the visions of Revelation 5 and Revelation 7, where you have these, you know, these throngs of people made up of people from every tribe and every nation, but they're singing something terribly propositional, which is, worthy is the lamb who was slain. And there's tons of propositions built into, worthy is the lamb who was slain. So, and, you know, you can, you can get very Gerardiian at that point in terms of the, the lamb who was slain, the scapegoat, and how does this slain lamb then bring peace, as Paul says, between the, the, you know, this barrier of hostility between Jews and Gentiles and off we go in that. Well, this, do you have any thoughts, Jeff? I was just gonna, maybe, I was maybe gonna take it on a slight tangent, but what you just said just made me think of that is that I think another piece that you could think about with the whole propositional thing, and worthy is the lamb at the end of Revelation is, That's in the middle. Yeah, well, the end of the Bible. Behold, I make all things new. That's at the end. Yeah, it's one of the things that I've been thinking about a lot. As I describe these things, this is what Sherry tells me. And the lake of fire, let's not forget that. The lake of fire, yeah, well, we could talk about that, too. The trigger of the discord. We're having a third hell conversation, is that We can do that. Oh, let's not keep going. Sorry. Shut up. One of the things is, because Sherry is becoming kind of the discord patristic scholar, because she just reads everything and stays awake all night. But as I describe these things, because she's one of the other people that I'll just send my sprawling audio thoughts to things, and then she responds. And she told me recently that she's like, what I think, she thinks what I'm describing with my egoic intellect in some of these things is essentially what Maximus the Confessor called the nomic will. And the nomic will, from what I understand of it, I mean, I haven't done a ton of reading on it, but Wikipedia has a kind of a cliff note summary. But it's interesting, because it's something I've thought about a lot, is the analytical, it's kind of the mind that analyzes, that chooses between options. That like, says, it's essentially almost like a libertarian, it's like how you could understand libertarian freedom in a way is just like this option or this option. And Maximus was essentially, what he was saying is that, and this is Trinitarian theology again, is that Jesus was of such a kind and of one essence with the Father and undivided in such a way that he didn't have a nomic will. A nomic will is the kind of thing that we have in the fall, where we sit here and we do, another way that I would describe it in biblical language is double mindedness. We have, we are of two minds, where Paul in like Romans seven, even like, a wretched man that I am, I want to do this, but then I end up doing this. Or Jesus says, like, the eye is the lamp of the body, you know, or a house divided cannot fall. All of that stuff, I think is essentially what Maximus is getting into with like a nomic will. And I think, and I would argue that it's very true that Jesus, I think it's an error to impose upon Jesus, like even, and Sam and I have talked about this a little bit, even like Jesus being tested, Jesus was tested and tempted, because in the New Testament, those words can be just, it's the same word. Jesus was not tempted in the way that I am tempted. I don't think that's what the Bible's saying. Jesus was not sitting there deciding like, he wasn't having the kind of experience that I have, like, should I yell at my kids? Should I not? I don't think Jesus ever had that. Like he, I think Jesus had a struggle. No, he did. But I don't, but I don't think, but he never said, like, be angry and do not sin. And so he never debated, should I yell at my disciples? Yeah, he just did it. The easiest way, the easiest way to say it is, he only ever did the will of the Father. Right, right. That's what you're saying when he said, did not sin. But what are you saying Hebrews says, that sermon in Hebrews that says, you know, he knows us because he knows how we are, you know, how we are tempted and tested. So I see you squaring one side of that, but I'm curious what you do with the other. So like, this is where, so like, this is where I don't know exactly how to talk about it, because I do believe, like, these are the verses where Jesus said, like, he was perfected by what he suffered. And this is where I think Jesus in becoming a man, the way that he was tempted and tested was that he endured all the kinds of experiences that we have, but not exactly in the same way, because he did it without sin. He never did it with a divided eye. His eye was always unified with the will of the Father. Like the garden, I think, I think the high, like the garden of Gethsemane and the high priestly prayer is just like the most condensed form of this. Was it potential that Jesus could sin? I don't think so, no. See, now we're getting really theological here, because, yeah, well, then the question is, was he fully human? But I don't think that's what being fully human, like, this is, this is the, I think this gets at, well, this will really derail it. This gets into what I would call the idolatry of libertarian freedom and agency as ultimate. I just don't see that whatsoever. I don't think that you need libertarian freedom to have love, because I don't think, I don't think Jesus had that, because ultimately all my theology comes from, comes from God and the Trinity. I don't, I don't like start with abstracted laws that then I subject the Trinity to. I got to get this quotation down here, because this is going to be a real keeper. Ultimately, I think that all my theology comes from God and the Trinity, and I think that's and the Trinity. Well, I mean, and again, Luke, Thompson, everything, everything that I'm, I'm not saying I'm right about it. He certainly left his Calvinist roots behind. Well, I don't know what I think about all that kind of stuff. I think I heard a, I think I heard a better interpret, Jeff, because I, this was interesting. Well, I don't know if I can interpret that. There's some, I mean, no, but I think I heard in there, the question, did Jesus inherit any of the fallen nature of humanity? And I, from how I understand it, I think some of our Catholic folks on the Discord would jump in and say, immaculate conception, and Mary was without sin. Right? Maybe I'm misinterpreting what the Catholic understanding of that is, but it's a very interesting question, you know, because when you're talking about, did Jesus experience those temptations in the same way, was the ability to sin, was there potential for Jesus to sin? I was having a discussion yesterday about, we were talking about identity, and whether or not, and this actually came up on the Discord today, whether or not someone who has not experienced the particulars of someone else's lived experience, so say, for example, I don't know what it's like to live in America as a woman, or as a black person, or any particular identity group that you can name that doesn't match my, quote unquote, identity group, I have never experienced anything other than my own experience. Right? And so, does, am I required to have that particular experience in order to do anything valuable in, or to add any value to a conversation about that particular experience? And so, I was having a conversation, actually, with a theologian about this yesterday, and she was telling me, you know, she asked me, do we need a savior that has experienced all of the particulars in order to be able to save humanity? And so, what I gave to her was, I'm not really sure I know the answer to that question, but the first illustration that popped into my mind, being someone who's worked in the business world for a couple of decades now, is, well, first illustration I can think of is a CEO. And in order for a CEO to do a really good job, the CEO doesn't need to be able to come down to an entry-level position and be able to perform that position at the same level as the entry-level person to fully understand all the particulars of what's needed to do that job and to know it, to be able to embody it, necessarily. It's almost as if the CEO is able to better serve if the CEO is not able to do all of those things as well as that person, because they are able to then better appreciate what that person has to offer in that position. And so, you know, this is, of course, not a good analogy. This was just an illustration that popped into my mind, you know, but what the CEO needs to be able to do well is to be able to see and connect with that person on such a level where that person feels like they are understood and that they are connected to. And so, for me, all of this might tie back to that question of, well, was it possible for Jesus to send? I think, at least it seems like, even if it were impossible for Jesus to send, I don't think that that necessarily means that Jesus cannot connect with us and understand what our plight is like. I think that's really helpful, because the question, of course, haunts would Jesus need to be a disabled gay woman of color in order to save disabled gay women of color? Who says he wasn't, Paul? Well, and this, you know, I remember when I was in Nicaragua in the 80s. I remember when I was in Nicaragua in the 80s, there is a very interesting church in Nicaragua. You know, this is the height of liberation theology, where you had these murals of Sandinistas hanging naked on the cross. And, you know, where you have, in my father's study, there's a picture of Black Jesus hanging on the cross. And this very much gets into this question. But, and I think, Luke, or Jeff, your observation of the CEO illustration, I think, is a helpful one. I would alter it a little bit, because, again, this is why I take notes during these things. The CEO doesn't need to do an entry-level position in order to fully understand, you said. I would say, what the CEO needs to do is understand sufficiently. And this, I think, gets into this question of temptation. You know, there needs to be, Jesus would need to be sufficiently tempted. Now, the degree to which we can propositionally, accurately, actually suss this out and hold that propositional idea in our brain sufficiently correctly, I mean, that gets terribly theoretical. But what tends to trigger, where this tends to go is, again, C.S. Lewis's essay on, it's really hard to take notes while I'm talking, because otherwise I don't get any notes about what I say. But I wanted to get this in. C.S. Lewis's essay on equality, because how Christ, you know, one of the things I really love about Jonathan Peugeot's work is probably, he's helped me probably more than anyone understand how Christ, because of the hierarchy framework that Jonathan keeps insisting on, something that is very countercultural to, you know, to American egalitarianism. And he shows how Christ fills up the hierarchy from top to bottom. And once you see that, you find it all over the Gospels, where on one hand, and you know, I've been preaching in 1 Peter, and it's all over the book of 1 Peter, because the New Testament is always playing with these ideas, where Christ is, well, he's God. And that's part of my complaint against the Unitarians, because what the Unitarian position finally insists is that he must be a step down from the Father. And, you know, of course, the Trinitarians monkeyed with this, and whether we're getting them off, you know, I don't know, put that over there. But Jesus is at the absolute pinnacle of the hierarchy, which is what God means. But then when he tells the disciples that, you know, because they've got the sharp elbows, and they want to be the greatest, well, what must you be in order to be the greatest? The servant or the slave, the doulos, the doulos of Todu, of all. And there you've got the both ends of the hierarchy, God and the servant of all. So how does Jesus, how does Jesus touch the disabled gay woman of color? Well, because in Christ, there are, you know, the CEO, on a particular hierarchy, the CEO has his status and his role to play. But the entry level worker also has his or her status and the role to play. And the CEO can't play that entry worker role. And the entry worker can't play the CEO role. And so right there, there's both a hierarchy and an equality. And they both come together at the same time. And that's what CS Lewis gets into with his essay on equality, because what Lewis then talks about is the specific pleasure of the inferior. And in our egalitarian ears, that is so offensive. Just the inferior is offensive. But what Lewis illustrates with a couple little illustrations and, you know, draw it into the gospel and what Jesus illustrates is that there's no, the inferior is not inferior. And so but you can't lose inferiority, even though you do lose inferiority. And so it seems to violate non-contradiction. But in Christ, this happens so that, you know, Sarah Smith, this quote I read from the great divorce in for one of my sermons recently, I mean, talk about a plain name, Sarah Smith from Golders and somebody, it was great. Somebody in England said, yeah, that's a suburb of such and such a place. Because of course, Lewis used real references that this common woman, who was in some ways the least of these now in, you know, in Lewis's heaven becomes the center of glory to the point that the visitor, you know, is this, you know, is this God? Is this Mary? Is this, you know, no, this is a woman that lived in a small place and perhaps made her living scrubbing floors for wealthier people. But now she's celebrated. And so what you find in Christ is that all of this is, is built into Christ. And so the specific pleasure of the inferior becomes glorious, just like the glory of the CEO. But there's place for both. I think it was in Lewis's membership essay where he talked about something similar to this. It may have been in the membership essay where he was talking about how he had two points and they both, one led to the other. Where he's talking about the necessity of egalitarianism in politics because of the evil that is in people. Equality is good medicine, but not good food. That's his quote. That was his quote. And but then he also, he also talked about but then he also, he also talked about how the church is a place that encourages us to remember what eating the food is like because there are stations, there are positions which receive honor. And then there are also stations which supplicate, right? And that it's built, a need is built into us to be able to supplicate to something worthy of supplication. And that's what these rituals in church where you have a priest and when you prostrate yourself and you venerate, you know, either icons or also the, I don't understand this well at all because I've been to Father, I've been to Father David's church one time and it's as if the priest is like a physical representation or manifestation is the wrong word, but like a symbol of Christ, right? And so there's a lot of honor that is given in those circles. And so, you know, this just connected for me with Louis of how it is right and good to show honor to those things that are higher than us because even in showing that honor, we are becoming more truly human and more ourselves. Louis does it much better than I do, but that's kind of the gist of what I was getting from it. Well, I think that's exactly right. And so again, back to the stories of old, I mean, it was really good in the second of the videos, he notes Peugeot's, I think, really excellent observation when Peugeot treated it when the Wonder Woman movie came out that the, so what our culture has done is cast women in masculine roles. And what that creates then is the only kind of glorious power we recognize is masculine. And so even, what's that? It's anti-feminist. Right. So even in the attempt to banish a supremacy of the male over female, an attempt to banish the patriarchy, what you wind up doing is, we don't have a word for it, the masculinearchy. What you do is you instantiate the masculinearchy in an attempt to banish the patriarchy, because now the masculine is the only power that has supremacy. And well, now we get back to instantiation and actuality. Well, who's going to win that game nine times out of 10 in the Aristotelian world of real people and things? Guess what? It's people with testosterone pumping through their bodies. Okay, so let's pump testosterone through bodies with XX chromosomes. Well, what happens? Well, they develop higher rates of cancer and you scotch their capacity to produce children and, and, and, and, and, and, and so, you know, suddenly we wind up with this bizarro world where, you know, and again, now we're back into Peugeot's clown world, where the fringe tries to take over the center and the center in order to establish some kind of moral hierarchy pretends to go to the fringe, but doesn't really. But that's, but that's so, but this is so in its most extreme form, almost, this is, I think, the fruit of the original point of proposition as potential versus reality is that what is, my idea about my identity, I am like, I am a woman is more real than the fact that I have a penis. You know, or like, yeah, I just got so many hot takes from Luke this video. I am a woman. The fact that I have a hot take, I have a penis. We believe you. We believe you. But, but I mean, I don't think that's, I guess, I guess that's the thing that I, that I, that I want Christians to realize, I think, is that. That you want Christians to realize a propositional truth. No, that I want them to realize it more, but the only way you can convey it to them is a proposition. I mean, and that's the, that's the trick of this thing. Is that even in an attempt to. I'm trying to illustrate a spirit. What's that? I'm trying to, I'm trying to like, test and discern a spirit. I don't want to just label it. I want to say this is the recurrent pattern. And this is the thing. Yeah. And I can only tell you that propositionally. Yes. Absolutely. But like, this is the recurrent pattern that you that we're seeing. And this phenomenon with transgenderism is downstream of this, of this reality. That's the manifestation. I'm trying to talk about the spirit, which is fine. And I can only convey, I'm not, again, I'm not against propositions, but I'm trying to say like, if, if you want to treat that in a way that isn't just like excluding bad, wrong, dualistic, you guys are bad people, culture wars. If you want to actually treat that spirit, then, then we need to go back and realize what propositions are and take the log out of our eye. That's what I'm trying to say. Well, the, the, and, and again, this, this illustration of that when we use the third person and the second person and the first person lends power to the, the power of witness, because witness is the first person. Witness is I, I, I can't label you. I can't misgender you, or maybe I won't misgender you or label you. And I won't even do so by insinuation by declaring the propositional that a woman plus testosterone plus surgery equals a man. I won't even, I won't even play in the propositional realm. What is the power? It is the power of witness. And, and so when, and so when, when, when I see the, the stereotypical straight white male bending over backwards publicly affirming their publicly acknowledging their privilege, but, you know, not, not becoming the, not living as the disabled gay woman of color. There's a, there's a lack of witness in that there's a lack of witness and a falsity in that acknowledgement of privilege that, that endures no matter how much racism coaching they get. And, and so what, what you begin to see then is then again, both why this comes out of Christianity and how Christianity actually anticipates and manages these issues. And, and so again, I've been preaching through the book of first Peter and, you know, one of the delights of being a pastor who also makes videos is that on one hand, I've got the, this video stream going where I'm working through these ideas and talking with you guys. On the other hand, I'm working these biblical books. And so right there in first Peter, at the end of chapter two, in the beginning of chapter three, there are these terribly offensive passages where Peter says to slaves obey your masters, as you would the Lord, even the unjust ones. And we look at that and we recoil. No, the, the path of, the path of redemption is revolution. And then it goes further because, you know, we don't have a lot of people that we label as slaves around. Women, submit to your husbands and that, you know, well, now it's really on and, and no, it's the path of revolution of self-assertion. And, and now obviously, you know, Romans 13 is, is, is you have to, your Bible both has Romans 13 and these passages, as well as Acts three and four. And, you know, Paul, you know, and Jesus play very interesting games with respect to obeying authority. Jesus does not always obey the religious authorities. Jesus does not always obey the Roman authorities. And you see that worked through in Christ's story, but the, you know, the alarming assertion of the gospel is that God became Philippians two, God became a slave in Jesus Christ. And in this way, in Christ, the universe is filled. Even if in the age of decay, you are a disabled gay woman of color, or a sex slave in a Vietnamese brothel, or, or a Haitian cane cutter, or a grunt in some call center in, in suburban Dallas, making minimum wage. And so sat now suddenly there's hope, not just for the heroes of the world, but for the slaves. And, and that all comes together. And so you will be my witnesses is a story of, well, you know, you're going to talk a lot and not be understood, and you're going to be abused for it, and they're going to take your life. But I'll raise you. I'm not so sure about the resurrection thing. Well, then the rest of the story doesn't make much sense either. I'm sorry, you got me preaching. I'll shut up. Oh, it's good. Go ahead, Jeff. I, I think we could talk for a really long time, but I actually have to run. So no need for you guys to stop, but I will have to I have to dip out. Well, let's not break up the trilogy. I have I'm fake preaching in order to to real preach a little later down this week. But thank you both. And any any last things you want to put in there? Plug for the randos channel. Jeff always for the randos channel is, you know, feel free to send content because that's what it's all about. It's not about one person. It's about a it's about a group of us just having these conversations and trying to get places that we couldn't get without each other. So there's the plug for the randos channel. You're you are the content creator. I think it's I think it's the essence of YouTube, frankly. I think it's what YouTube ought to be. So randos, randos, randos united. All right. Thank you, gents. Okay, thank you, Paul. Oh, recording for just a second. I do need to stick around for one thing. Okay, I'll stop recording.