https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ucjss0bm8lo

 It's nice to see you. It's good to see you. I'm great. Yeah, this is lovely. How have you been? I've been great. Yeah, what's going on? It's been a while, hey? Yeah, it has been a while. Yeah, we're just hunkering down for the virus, getting our seeding ready. Almost time for spring seeding. So we're busy with that. Okay. Have I ever told you what my job is when it comes to seeding and that type of deal? No. I'm the guy who injects the shit into the field. I think that's what I do to the conversation as well. You make it fertile. You know, that's the way the conversations grow. Oh, yeah. What's the metaphor? Have you been doing welding? I mean, is it just, is you're just doing all kinds of things? Oh, yeah. Yeah, the welding shop is pretty busy right now. So just, we're doing all kinds of stuff right now, making some packers. We did a shipment of dumpsters a week or so ago, so keep them busy. And yeah. It's been, gosh, how long ago since we had our first conversation? That's a couple years now? Yeah, I think it was something like 2018. The other day someone asked me, when did you start your blog? And then I looked and it was 2018, which is two years ago. And it was you who got me into that. So thanks for that. But two years, it just, I wouldn't have thought it's been that long. Yeah, I know. I know. Well, a lot has happened. You're not married though. I mean, come on. I mean, what's going on? Is there a problem here? I mean, nice young man like yourself? I suppose the Astro Riley thing fell through. Yeah, she went for another man. The one who got away. You and Esther would not have, that would not have gone very well. We'd have to become Catholic so that we could get an element. Oh, wow. But you've had plenty of conversations with the randos. And you keep, you know, chiming in on the discord. It's been really good. Well, maybe, you know, before we get into whatever the heck you want to talk about, maybe, you know, because right now there's a lot of, you know, sort of, I was actually just chatting with Esther and Alastair Roberts on Twitter because we're talking about the three of us doing a conversation following up on, you know, they wrote, they both wrote chapters in this book. And, you know, the Jordan Peterson wave seems like a long, long time ago. And just this morning, I saw, you know, signs of life from Jordan Peterson on Instagram and Twitter. So, who knows? Who knows what's coming? Well, is your saturation point not far above the limit when it comes to Jordan Peterson? I mean, I've tried listening to some of his international tour lectures, and I just, I couldn't do it. Oh, it's decadent. My take on what happened to the book tour was decadence. And I read Dalfit's book, and I thought, yeah, that's the right word for that. And I'm hoping, I'm hoping wave, I'm hoping what comes out now will be wave 2.0 and not 1.2. So that's... I find it hard to believe. Yeah, I don't know if maybe if he can get out of his political stuff, maybe. But yeah, which part of what I want to argue to you today is that the political stuff is kind of fundamental to Peterson's whole project. I think I don't think they can be disentangled. But what were you going to say? No, I keep going. That's an interesting way to begin. I think it's true. You know, the wave, he would not have had the wave he had if in the moment, you know, and it was a political moment when he said, you know, C-16, nuts. I, you know, you won't make me do it. I, you know, if you put me in jail, I won't eat, you know. I mean, so it was a political moment. So on that point, you're right. But keep going. I want to hear your argument. Well, I think this is a bit of a long argument. But I think... What do we got? You know, where are we going? Let me back up a bit and try to make a different connection before I get to Peterson. I think apologetics is essentially a political project as well. So there we go, Astro Island. I like it. Keep going, Julian. OK, think about this. Just inject that shit right in this conversation. It'll get real fertile. I think you're right. Oh, OK. So let's think about it this way. You have sort of pre-modernity and you have the Middle Ages. And you have this certain way of structuring, you know, this certain hierarchy, this certain way of having political power, where the church and the state are sort of intertwined. And, you know, the most powerful people are, you know, maybe the bishops, the pope, the kings, the lords. And there's this whole hierarchy. And it's sort of the way you get political power is maybe you can maybe if you're rich, you can buy it. If you are if you're really if you have a good lineage, you can you can get your way up. And so there's sort of this this kind of political power where it's the most pious or the most well-bred people essentially who who get the political power. But then you get the Enlightenment and suddenly you have this whole. Don't jump over the Protestant Reformation. OK. Well, let's say that the Protestant Reformation is the first subversion of that hierarchy, which leads to the to the to the to the Enlightenment down the long run, I think. I'm not really I can't really say much about the Protestant Reformation because I hadn't thought about that. But it's a good point. Maybe you want to jump in. But so you get the Enlightenment and suddenly what you have is it's no longer the pious or the well-bred who get to the top of the heap. It's the most rational who can make the best arguments. It's it's the scientific class. It's the the philosophers. It's the thinkers. And suddenly the you know, a theologian becomes someone who's who's looked down upon because, you know, he belongs to a different class. And suddenly, if you want to gain political power in modernity, you have to be able to, you know, make the arguments be irrational. And suddenly, there's this whole new playing field where you sort of have to argue for your positions in this public secular realm in order to gain political power. Then if we if we jump all the way up to the present, I think the sort of apologists versus new atheists battle is essentially a continuation of the culture wars where you have, you know, the religious right sort of pushing to get their version of politics. Sort of rubber stamped by being able to make arguments for the resurrection and or, you know, proving with science that God exists or what have you. And then the new atheists come along and say, you know what, we don't like these religious people pushing pushing their religious ideas into the public realm and influencing politics. So you have Dawkins sort of pushing back and as you've mentioned a lot of the times explicitly, you know, explicitly because of what he sees going on politically. So it's I sort of see apologetics as, you know, the Christians saying, you know, we're sort of losing political power. So why don't we sort of turn Christianity into this rational system that can go head to head with these with these atheists and and and and that way it sort of gained political power. What do we want to go from here? So, oh, so now what's happened recently, which is super interesting is you suddenly have a new alliance forming between the new atheists and the Christian apologists. And who are they fighting? They're fighting the woke progressive postmodernists. Why is that happening? It's happening because the postmodernists are subverting this whole rationality game and say, you know, what does rationality actually mean? Like, what, what, they're sort of just taking this playing field and starting to poke holes in it. And now it's no longer the most rational, whatever that means, who gets to the top of the heap. There's this whole new game being played. And the the apologists, the apologists of the new atheists are like, you know, we had this pretty good thing going with all of our debates and our rational rationaling it out. So why don't we don't like these postmodernists sort of poking our game in the axioms. So let's go after the postmodernists together. So there's this new alliance of the of the apologists and the new atheists against the progressive against the progressive postmodernists. So I think that's that's an interesting. I suppose what I'm trying to say with that, I think we need to think about power in this whole conversation. Some more, because I think it's sort of an aspect of all of this that hasn't really entered the conversation that much, partly because Peterson sort of has a blind spot when it comes to that, because he sort of styles himself as being anti political. In some sense, and and sort of prioritizes the individual over the social or over the collective. So what do you think of that whole scheme? Well, let's let's I think so. Tomorrow I'm talking to someone who who highlighted wanted to highlight the power of the postmodernists. And to highlight the role that institutions are playing. And I think to I think one way of one way of, let's say, injecting some color dye into the narrative that you just laid out would be to to follow the institutions. And I think that gets that begins to get at. I mean, whenever people say power, you know, power is a pretty fudgy word. I want to ask, OK, what do you mean by power? And I think, you know, what you're talking about are institutional power, institutional power. So I was power as well. Yeah, cultural powers. I mean, just can I just poke a bit? I mean, just the stigma that gets attached to someone who's irrational or who's superstitious or who's religious or who's mentally disabled. Like, I think those are all forms of our showing what our hierarchy is of rationality. Where these people who sort of can't get there can sort of climb the ladder are sort of pushed down to the bottom culturally and stigmatized in that way. So it's going to be another aspect. So so you sent me the Caputo write video, which I thought was just excellent. The problem, you know, I actually got a text from a friend this morning because, you know, I didn't put out a video today and he says, you've been kind of quiet. Is everything OK? It's like, yeah, you know, I've got this. I've got there are five adults living in my house that I have to feed now. I've got two college kids that started their academic career homeschooling and now they're going to college from home. I've got a wife who is doing some really cool things, trying to support her families effectively to homeschool. Because they can't go to the public school, but she's just running headlong into an enormous public school establishment that goes all the way to the, quote unquote, nation state of California. So everybody, everybody and then my other daughter is working in a state office from home and her PC died this morning. So and of course, I, you know, over the weekend I was unclogging drains and I'm fixing everybody's computers. And today I went to Costco and so it's just been I haven't had time to make videos. So I'm fine. I haven't had time to make videos. And what happened? So then you send me this Caputo Wright video and I listen to that and that's that video is just like, oh, wow, so many of the things, you know, the post that the non theism and all of these. And so yeah, yeah. And then you give me that video and I already have four or five other videos I want to comment on. You send this juicy one right down the right down the middle. But but that video very much touches on this because yeah, yeah. I mean, I wanted to get to that too. Yeah. Yeah. Because keep going. So Caputo, you know, talks about the Enlightenment and, you know, so so the Protestant Reformation in certain parts of Europe, you know, where basically, you know, one of the ways to understand very high level the history of the very high level the history of Europe is the history of of the relationship between two institutions, church and state. So you've got the Roman period where, you know, you've got the emperor and the the cult of the emperor were were church, you know, church and state are one, but it's over a poly theistic world where you can easily manage multiple religions, you know, worship any God you want, as long as you know you honor the, the state cult. And so, and then of course you have the collapse you have, you know, let's bring in doubt that's decadence you have the collapse of the Roman Empire over a long period of time in the West and then much later in the East pushed over by Islam into a whole nother route. But in the West, at least the with the collapse of Rome, you have this, this, the, the last institution left standing in many ways because paganism at its heart is highly individualistic and and it might, you know, sort of what happens in Empire is all the little nation national religions get chewed up by, you know, the monsters coming out of the great deal. And it emerges, of course, in the West, then, you know, the power of the bishops and, but, you know, it's helpful to to understand that. Well, you also had, you know, you also had these warlords basically from the, from the barbarian nomadic tribes who would, you know, kind of do cultural assimilation on Rome and take the power of the bishops and the power of the bishops. And they would take things over. So yeah, you know, the Middle Ages is this vast, very complex context in which state power which is sort of clannish and then tribal and then kings, you know, monarchy develops. Church I mean this whole thing in Europe is just ongoing, you know, just just kind of crazy. And loose confederacy. And, you know, if you look at, for example, the, the Renaissance period in. There are times when the papacy was enormously weak. I mean, and so fractured. In fact, at one point, you have three popes. So, so you have this, you have this long, you have this long process by which the institutions of, of the civil, the civil authorities and the religious authorities. I mean, it's just constantly co developing over a great period of time. And of course comes the Protestant Reformation, which is at least, boy, I always get into trouble when I say this. It's at least as much a political movement as it was a religious movement in some ways. Because, can I interrupt for I mean, just the category of separating religion and politics is sort of something that I think that's something that basically gets invented at the Protestant Reformation, you can't really untangle the two beforehand, I think might be something just to throw into your thoughts here. I think it's that the, the, the imagination that you can separate them comes at the enlightenment. And you know, individuals like Voltaire. Well, tear basically says, you know, the the Muslim and the Jew, and the Catholic and the Protestant. If they're, if they're on the dark and they're on the docks in commerce, they can get along just fine. And so this, this secular space as Tom Holland talks about this, this imagination of the secular developed something which is, which is a new thing, you couldn't find it in the Roman Empire, even, you know, I'd encourage people to go ahead, go back and actually read Plato, because I think a lot of people today in secular education would imagine the Greeks to be secularists. But if you read Plato, you know, you're talking about the gods, and then sometimes God singular, and nobody pauses. I mean, I was reading this a few years ago and I was reading along, I was like, Oh, wait a minute. So then I bought I got a copy of it in Greek and I was looking through it and you know, it's like, these these these were not secular people. Oh no. Yeah. And, and so bring Charles Taylor and maybe as another Charles Taylor is another guy to bring into the. I think he's behind it, the story you're telling. So, So, so you know, out of the enlightenment comes comes the imagination that this secular space can, you know, and Charles Taylor and I think also I mean Tom Holland. I think nicely in the videos and the conversations he's been doing has been noticing that secularity is actually a really sneaky version of Christianity that gets promoted. And, you know, you find this. So I was, so I was I've also been, you know, obviously, I've watched a number of videos with with Peter teal and empty right. And, you know, empty right makes the observation that the role that the church played at the collapse of the Roman Empire in terms of caring for the poor hospitality, you know, medicine, benevolence, Western states have basically grown over and assimilated and taken over these roles. And the assumption is that, you know, states ought to do this and so Democrats and Republicans in the United States who, well, you know, fight over all kinds of things suddenly a pandemic hits and boom, hey, let's add $4 trillion to the national debt, you know, without, you know, without, you know, bang like that. And it's like, oh, well, um, well, here's something everyone seems to agree on that it's the role of the government to help individuals have certain kinds of lifestyle and to keep them alive. Where did that come from? That and so it so you know what we have so you get obviously the the great American and the great American experiment where there is no state church, the federal government has no state church, there are sort of, you know, states have their own, you know, they know that the states are sort of separated religiously as you get the Quakers and the Puritans and the Anglicans and but but but you know, the federal government is supposed to be the state of the United States. But, you know, the federal government is supposed to be religion blind, as it were. And of course, it's Jefferson that that gets make sure that that Bill of Rights gets in there and and the rest of the world adopts this position, of course, with the now sort of with the, the new Islamic states that are, you know, but but even but even though that you know, you look at that and that's just sort of a, yeah, you're going to try that again. Good luck. See, see how that goes. So, you know, your your story here of, you know, power and political power. In a sense, you know, when I began listening to Jordan Peterson Jordan Peterson starts Basically, in some ways, I mean, Caputo is interesting because Caputo gets to the end and you learn he was raised as a he was raised as a young Catholic. And then suddenly the whole rest of the conversation is seen very much in the light of what to 300 years of theology and philosophy has been, which is an attempt to somehow hold on to the receding son of God as it seems to keep going off into the distance and Postmodern Christianity as Caputo calls it is well that's just sort of, well, this the prophets talk about justice and so this will be about justice. Oh, okay. But, and then Jordan Peterson comes along and says, Hey, wait a minute. And Jordan Peterson says, Hey, wait a minute. Um, what do you mean by justice. No, don't ask uncomfortable questions like that. And, and Jordan Peterson then says, you ought to, you ought to have a little bit gratitude about what has come about because the difficulty with with post modernity is that It's a, it's a, it's a solvent to deconstruct everything. And again, if you get back to the Benjamin voice. James Lindsay conversation where I think Lindsay really put his finger on it. He said, Yeah, if you're a social justice warrior, the one thing you won't deconstruct is your oppression. And if you can join that with a Caputo argument, you realize, oh, that's right. Your oppression is your God, your experience of oppression is your God. This is the one thing. This is the one immovable place in the universe upon which you will build the difficulty is You'll never be able to build a community upon it because the intersectionality will always just keep chipping away at it. Along comes a pandemic and now suddenly, yeah, little cries about, well, the pandemic hits people unequally. Yeah, of course it hits people unequally. And of course it's going to run up different structures and poor people are going to have a lot be hit a lot worse and so on and so forth. But, you know, suddenly, the whole everything goes out of the woke argument. Now, everybody's just kind of waiting to see if we'll all just sort of get along and my, the longer I go with this stuff as I look at say someone like you, who is Oh, this is going to really sound weird. In some ways, you're a Canadian Islamic fundamentalist. Islamic, but you're a Canadian Christian fundamentalist because, you know, any community that I have very little respect for a lot of woke people because basically I don't see them doing half of the Half of I don't see them pursuing Half their their justice half as seriously as I saw people in the 70s pursuing racial justice by taking lower paying jobs and living in the my parents story And the lifestyle that I was raised with and I look at you and you're living in community or as a community you're practicing self denial you say no to yourselves. And I look at all these social justice warriors and I think you're putzes. You know, you know, leave the job, leave the job for someone else. Okay. And go ahead and give up your give up your great job and Jordan Peterson says that to the The chick from the GQ or, you know, interview and says, Well, why don't you give up your job. I like my job. Yeah, you're a putz. You want to see someone who really believes in their worldview. Look at someone who suffers. Look at someone who denies themselves. Look at someone who looks at you's Brett, Brett Weinstein. Look at someone who decides he's going to teach in this little this little college at least in alignment with his little, you know, sort of woke religion until that religion turns and kicks him out. So, I, you know, There's a whole lot of stuff I just dumped on you. Like I said, I haven't had time to make a video. I'm all pent up. Yeah, just throw it all out there. Oh, okay. Man. Where do you start here? See, I wonder if this whole see I'm thinking about the way you're using the postmodernity as sort of Something you can just reject and I don't I don't know if that's entirely the case. It sort of get my get what I'm saying. Like, um, you're sort of saying, oh, oh, there was What was your what were you saying. What was your what were you saying. I'll finish it for you. You do it. You just rejected as Peter Sonia, because you don't have time to deconstruct everything. So in order to ask, okay, it must be an area of your life. You're not deconstructing. That's the only way you can live. Okay, here's how I would refrain that I think Peterson is essentially his project is essentially a response to postmodern postmodernity. And I think essentially what this whole conversation is is with the meaning crisis and these different camps and these different responses. It's essentially You know, how do we react to this problem of interpretation this problem of the fall of meta narratives. And where do I go. So, so, so right now I'm reading another book by what last time we talked, I was reading a book by James K Smith and I'm reading another one. Which one are you reading now. I'm reading his introduction to radical orthodoxy and I haven't read that. This one is is just super relevant, I think, too, because One of the things verveke keeps saying is he doesn't see theology, giving a response to the meeting crisis. And as I'm reading this book, what I'm realizing is this is so so he's doing this, this book on radical orthodoxy, I realize This is essentially a book, a theological movement that's responding to precisely the problem that verveke and Pippin are talking about. And it's precisely the problem that verveke and Peterson are trying to solve in their different ways. And I wonder if Peterson and verveke could sort of be seen as You know, Caputo is someone who would Who would fall into that whole conversation, but he wouldn't be radically orthodox. So let me try to sort of sketch it out. So essentially what these, what these thinkers are saying is They're sort of pointing out that the postmodern critique of secular reason. You know, sort of this, we're talking about how the secular developed as, you know, the religion and politics were sort of close intertwined and then you have suddenly this development of this secular space where you can use secular reason To pursue your political projects or what have you. And then so you get the development of liberalism. Classical liberalism, which is basically, you know, individual rights, Individual Freedom, individual autonomy. These types of units, what that's what the American experiment is sort of all about is liberalism. And Goodness, where do you go? And it seems like This whole category of classical liberalism is so interesting to me because it's sort of assumed by This one tribe in the culture, it's sort of assumed by You know, we're talking about the new atheist and the fundamentalists both are sort of classical liberals, both of them Sort of want individual autonomy, individual Apologies, you called them the fundamentalists. Let's call them the apologists. Yeah, that's better. Yeah. Yeah. Sorry about that. Um, because fundamentalists are also a reaction to classical liberalism. Their communal reaction to classical liberalism, but they assume so much of the foundation that they themselves are also a product of classical liberalism. They just basically take the positivism and read their sacred texts through the positivism and get, you know, these other weird things. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Absolutely. And Peterson, I think, is a classical liberal as well. Yeah. And, and that's, that's sort of, that's why he's But he's a postmodern classical liberal. He does. He chooses it. And so if you look at that Edward Docs, did you see the latest video I did? Not yet. No. Okay. Well, I read an egg. I read a segment from Edward Docs, which was a 2011 Which is 2011 paper that I actually got from a Tim Keller sermon back probably around 2011 but But, you know, Docs makes the point that similar point to what Dreier makes in terms of pilgrims and tourists. What happens in postmodernity is, is you be, you begin to see yourself as set free from all of these narratives, which leads to sort of a radical freedom, very existentialist. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Now you can choose. And so instead of, say, growing up in classical liberalism, Jordan Peterson now is a postmodern classical liberal, which is still a different thing because he chooses it. So he's an existentialist, postmodernist, classical liberal. Okay, so this radical freedom of postmodernity where sort of our meta narratives fall flat and suddenly we have this, this absolute freedom. And this is where you get someone like Caputo who says, you know, we can sort of have this sense of transcendence within postmodernity. But what we need to avoid is, you know, particularity. We absolutely want to avoid any sort of particular narrative because that's fundamentally tyrannical. So he sort of has this version of Christianity that's That its only content is essentially freedom. Pure freedom is sort of all that's there. And he sort of speaks of, you know, something like justice for him is sort of this thing that we're going to come to discover in the future. But we sort of have this little grasp of it now. So we act on that which we have now, but it's, it's infinitely open to the future. And so we're sort of grasping our way towards the, sort of has this, he sort of takes the Christian narrative, but he sort of has this, he sort of takes the Christian narrative, but he sort of has this, he sort of takes the Christian narrative. And sort of makes it real or something like that. I am not sure. That's kind of a good way to say it. And, and then you have, on the other hand, sort of the I think I think I would, you know, the, the, the apologists, the classical liberals, the, the defenders of Christendom. And I think someone like Peterson is a pretty good candidate for this sort of opposite end of the spectrum. I think I think I would, you know, the, the, the apologists, the classical liberals, the, the defenders of Christendom. And I think someone like Peterson is a pretty good candidate for this sort of opposite end of someone like Caputo, because, hold on a second. Peterson, Peterson, for apologists, or some ways, defenders of Christendom, modernist Christendom, and Peterson is sort of like a mercenary out there. And they like the battle he's fighting. They'd really love to recruit him into their standing army, but he's not ready to take the vows of the kingdom. So, but they, but these are mercenary. But if you look at Peterson's biblical lectures, his sort of Jungian archetypal defense of Christianity, what he's sort of saying is, we need a meta narrative to keep our civilization going. And what we, we can sort of argue for it because that can be deconstructed. So you sort of have this biological Christianity that emerges from evolutionary history. So he, he's sort of within this. He's sort of on this, this, I can see why you want to push back on the, on calling him, putting him on the side of the apologists. He's sort of a post, I think you're right, he's a postmodern classical liberal who's doing this defense of Christendom argument. So, yeah. And, and then you have the radical orthodoxy people. And they're sort of in the sort of like to style themselves as being in the middle of those two camps. And what they do is they sort of, there's these reform thinkers who do something very similar. We sort of say, we need to prioritize revelation so we, right, we can't sort of reason our way to, to, to our meta narrative so we sort of do it through faith and revelation. And, and so we sort of presuppose the Christian story and then our rationality is sort of a Christian rationality and so they're doing sort of get this, this political, political pluralism where you have different traditions sort of competing with each other in, in this sort of postmodern frame. Where does this end up? Yeah. But, but I guess I suppose that that scheme of thinking about things. But, yeah, let's throw that out there. Well, I have to. That's so interesting. So Warren Warren has been sending me things on. Warren is my friend in Australia, he's been sending me videos on from john mill bank on radical orthodoxy and I just noted that I just I just downloaded the sample that john mill bank writes the forward to radical orthodoxy and so you're giving me more homework to do here. Don't bother reading mill bank. He's impossible. Don't bother reading mill bank. He's impossible to understand. Well, and so that's sort of gosh I get myself. So, of course, James K Smith is in my tribe he teaches at Calvin College and if we know if there is a tribe that I'm a part of it's Calvin College and that group. I mean there that's where I came from and so there are there are there are a few couple of people out there that want me to talk to James K Smith so badly that it hurts them, but I've not, I've not. I've not decided to pursue it and I don't I don't even know how that conversation would go and I don't know if I want to talk to him for a one or two hour video I I haven't. I haven't, I haven't read all his books because they frustrate me. Really, yeah. So, well, in some ways he's doing a lot of what I'm doing. He's, he's taking Charles Taylor he's taking mill bank he's taking Augustine and he's trying to deliver them in, you know, he's, he's, he's cutting the meat up for the kids. Let me throw something out. How about this, I think you and James K Smith are trying to answer the same problem, essentially, yes. And, and maybe you land up in a different place than he does. You think so? I don't know. I just, I listened to I like a lot of what I listen to some of his videos, but I read some of his books and I just don't, you know, I have the same thing with, I just, I just just don't get into all that I, I don't know if it's because I'm a pastor and he's a philosophy or what it is but I, you know, I would love it if he would, you know, jump into this space. But, you know, I, you know, so I know how he got on rebel wisdom. And I don't think I don't think James K Smith has any interest in addressing the people I'm addressing. Yeah, I think so. Yeah, he's probably a bit of an elitist in that way. And that's, that's probably and I don't know that he is but I think he's, gosh, I'm gonna get myself in so much trouble. Oh, yeah, let me rephrase that. No, no, no, but you said it I didn't. But, but, you know, I see him as being comfort comfortable doing the doing the circuit of all the, of all the talks and now maybe if I had more status and you know if, and this is this is where, you know, some of the same. I give to the social justice where I have to give to myself because decadence is so easy to slide into, you know, if I, if I made 10 times what I did, you know, if I dropped into all of the money that Jordan Peterson dropped into, what would that do to me. If I could go from city to city, making, you know, five, four or five figures every night, hawking a book that's selling millions of copies. Would I be talking to randos on YouTube. And, and, and this, this gets at the post modern thing because the point of that Edward Docs piece is that once you're done dissolving everything guess what's standing at the bottom. Money. Money and status, and the world. And, and, and this is why I, you know, so they had that conversation between Eric and Brett and Eric's portal. And I'm listening to Brett kind of chide, Eric kind of chide Brett for making the career choices he made instead of the ladder, and Eric's basically running a podcast that's, you know, going to flame the ladder, because the ladder isn't good enough but now we're just into an inner circle CS Lewis conversation so I don't know I have no, I have no finger to point to James K Smith with because, you know, in terms of what we're doing, I think, I think you're exactly right we're trying to work the same space but I'm a little pastor with a little YouTube channel and talking to randos and part of me thinks yeah if someone gave me a big fat contract to talk to all of the famous people and to do all this stuff would I do it probably and and the people behind me would cheer me on but I, I'm a son of people who decided to spend their lives, serving the poor and serving people without status. And so I can't look at that other path and not sense betrayal. Huh, huh. Well, I could give it, I could give you a more positive spin if you like, please do. Yeah, your, your choices. I mean you're a young man, you and the Apostle Paul says it very well he says hey you know, marry family. You know, I've got, I've got, I've got five, I've got four adults plus myself to feed during the pandemic at home it's like, you know, I hope the church doesn't go under during this thing. And what I keep an eye to keeping food in the mouths of my children. Yeah, well, well, think about this I think I think what James aka Smith is doing is he's doing postmodern apologetics essentially. And I think what he's what he realizes is that, you know, in this postmodern world, you can't really, you know, make arguments for the resurrection, or, you know, this is historically accurate and you have proof and it's 100% certain that that doesn't work for people. So I think what he's trying to do is sort of show how Christianity can address the cultural problems we're facing, how it can be a solution to the meeting crisis how it can be meaningful life giving. And at the same time push back against some of the problematic aspects of our culture. And I think then the, there's, there's a certain. I think when he's doing that type of work, it's a bit tough for him to sort of, you know, go on this shady YouTube channel and talk with these shady YouTube people, because he's trying to reach these mainstream postmodern culturally affluent people who, as soon as you find out you know look at this. Look at this Christian guy on this alt-right YouTube channel or what have you. He's the road Jordan Peterson's Cout Tales to 13,000 subs. Yeah, so yeah, yeah. That's exactly right. So yeah, that's, there's that. And it's no way to build a career. And this gets at a lot of the Eric Weinstein conversations, because what Eric is basically trying to do is point the finger to institutional corruption, which, which is in many ways the same game as the social justice wars, they're pointing the finger to institutional corruption and I, you know, I still think Peterson nailed a lot of this stuff quite well. Well, when, yeah, that's corrupt. Yeah, it's racist and that's why, you know, people, you're a bigot. I'm a bigot, I'm a Calvinist. I'm a bigot, I'm a sexist. You name me a sin and I'm it baby. Total depravity. Put a big T on my chest. And so yeah, that doesn't that doesn't surprise me but the difficulty is, okay, tell me what justice looks like and Christianity says justice looks like the Son of God bruised and bloody on the cross wearing the spittle of other men, and then walking out of a tomb, and not going to Caesar and say how do I look now. I mean, that's the Son of God and the status games are the greatest among you is the servant of all. And these, these ideas were these I hang on a second I got someone at the door. Okay. What's up. Oh, yeah. Oh, hello. Bring him over. You should probably did you bring your car. Take me on his amp is over there on the stage. Please. But you'll need you'll need the amp if you're gonna play the electric guitar. Where was I. Well that's, and so what Christian communities have done is embodied this in an alternate set of values within a community and bear witness to it to the world, and in that sense Rod Rears Benedict option is dead on right. But, but what post modernity says is that the sectarian otherwise just love it. Yeah, yeah, and you got there first, but now, but post modernity comes around and says, Well, okay. You have to choose it and now there's a way in which you choose it that it wasn't before. And I think that's because, you know, I grew up into the little Christian reformed way of, you know, I looked at the Benedict option I thought yeah Christian reform church has been doing that for a long time. Those immigrant groups have been little Benedict opting all over the place. So, but, but this is, this is our response to the world and we say we are going to bear witness to Jesus Christ and we're going to do so as a community, and we're going to bear witness to the great personal cost, because we believe that well we believe in the resurrection. And so the resurrection justifies laying down our lives for our neighbors, even if they don't appreciate it. That's the guy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, part of what's what post modernity entails is the, the loss of cultural power for Christians. You know, one of the things you often talk about on your channel is the boom of Christianity in the 50s where we have this civil religion type of thing. And I would sort of call that Christendom as you know the this this sort of nominally Christian civilization. And, you know, one of the things that post modernity does, which, which I as an Anabaptist think is kind of great is that it makes Christians lose their political power and have to find a way of being Christian. That is non coercive. And you know, as you said with with the resurrection. You know, you know what happens after after the crucifixion is the resurrection so so it's sort of a paradoxical time of hope for Christians. Yeah. But to get back into this narrative that we were weaving, you know, basically what happens after Christians inherit the kingdom of Rome and the Middle Ages that's what we're working through and then, in a sense, via colonialism, Christianity inherits the earth. And how well do Christians do with that. And so, yeah, exactly. Have a little bit of tension between Anabaptists and reformed. And in some ways, not having political power is a lot easier than, you know, the Romans collapse again. Well, we don't know what to go here you go Bishop, you run the city. Oh crap, how do I run the city as Christ would, and in many ways, it's what happens through history or we're wrestling with these eschatological questions. And so, you know, again, one of the things that that I've been fascinated by lately listening to Eric Weinstein and Peter Thiel is. So now you have these eschatological questions that people what is exactly progress. What does it mean to inherit the kingdom. Because Christians know how to do. Not made not a lot of individual Christians in North America, but over time, Christianity learned how to do cruciform community. And that was their identity. This is how, but, but it's, and, you know, john john Wesley pointed this out. He said, you know, the difficult thing is okay so you have, you know, it happened to the monasteries the monasteries. Everyone took these vows of poverty, and everybody was so impressed by that renunciation and mortification that they started writing fat checks. And suddenly the monasteries have huge amounts of cash. And so the Protestants come along and it's like, yeah, yeah, yeah, you're suffering for the Lord doesn't look like much suffering to me. And, you know, you have a kind of class and and so, you know, this is, and, you know, I really like Chesterton's point in at the end of the everlasting man that you have, you know, the five comings of Jesus Christ in a sense because we keep going around in this circle that Christians, Christians, Christians begin to embody the cruciform witness and now it doesn't happen in our little lifetime it happens multi generationally generationally Christians, in a sense, they die, and in a sense are given the kingdom and then when they have power. They are corrupted by it and the cycle starts over again. Yeah, yeah, totally. Yeah. I mean, let me let me take this in a bit of a different direction. One thing that's interesting about for Vicky and Peterson is how they're they're both they both sort of start constructing just, you know, for Vicky's religion without religion is is such an interesting idea because, you know, that's exactly the same, you know, Caputo says exactly the same thing. He also talks about religion without religion. Everybody's talking it right now. I mean, that's the thing. The Weinsteins are talking it but they don't dare say the words. Everybody's talking it. Yeah, I mean, just the I guess the this this collapse of the meta narrative this collapse of Christian Christendom really makes you ask the question of power, like what is, where are you going with this? What what institutions are going to build? How are you going to live together? And I sort of see Peterson and Vervicki sort of going in two different directions where if we want to be really crude, Peterson is sort of like the, you know, he ends up in Liberty University. And I wonder if that's not a not a not a coincidence because he's sort of saying we had this nice meta narrative thing going. So why don't we bring back Christendom? So and that's exactly what you see the, you know, the people at Liberty University doing. And then Vervicki starts talking about religion without religion. And then you think, you know, I can think of Christian groups that have been trying or secular groups or Christian groups that have been trying exactly that for, you know, the past decades or so you were talking to this guy from from formerly from the Christian Reformed Church now the United Church of Canada. I mean, John Sook. Yeah, I mean, where he landed up is, is basically religion without religion. Yeah. Yeah. So I sort of see us. Yeah, so so there's sort of that interesting parallel and then you're part of this whole conversation. So the question I have for you is, what is your, what is your religious project? What is your political project? Where what is your response to the meeting crisis and where where where do you want to go with this? Oh, Julian. Oh, I don't know. I'm just making YouTube's about thoughts I have in my mind. I'm a minister in the Christian Form Church. I want God's kingdom to come. I want I want I want the poor to find the joy of the Lord. I want racism to end. I mean, this is the thing about the whole social justice thing is that I've lived this stuff my whole life. I've lived this stuff my whole life. And I look at the answers. He's supposedly I feel so old because I remember talking to old pastors when I was starting and they're like, yeah, it's all the same answers coming around again. Now here I'm doing it. But I, you know, I and again, it's some ways it comes down to my question about, you know, what is Christianity that I that I trust Jesus more than I trust myself. I want to see I want to see I want to see an end. I want to see an end to the suffering in the world. I want to see. But we see we can't even figure out what eschatology means or what what what a life outside of the the the briars and the thistles we live in the midst of would actually look like. So I, you know, in some ways, so that's sort of puts me in some weird triangle with Peterson and verveky, because I'm not looking to reconstruct a religion because I'm happy with the one I've got. I am looking to build bridges to people who just kind of anyone. So that's puts me sort of by Peterson. And, you know, if I can help people one person at a time, you know, find a better life. I don't do that. You know, I don't, you know, I don't do the whole, oh, you're homeless and you need a little help. Well, if you if you say the sinner's prayer, there'll be plenty of help for you. You know, I'm not going to have them, you know, you're not going to have to show that you've been tithing in order to get your temple access card LDS church. You know, it's. And so that way I'm sort of in this weird triangle with Peterson and verveky. Because I'm an individualist like Peterson and I'll talk to randos and and but at the same time, a much more institutionally minded because I also know that the church, the church has the government's learned scale in many ways to bless people and help people from the church. In many ways, Western governments learned statecraft from the church and have basically subsumed many of the church's values. But, you know, it's so funny to me because I, at least in the American political conversation, I listened to the left and they just want more government and it's like, yeah, well how, you know, government, government decided it wanted to give everybody 1200 bucks. How's that going? Government decided so, you know, I'm just in the middle of everyone and I'm always in the middle. You know, I'm too, I'm too nice to the gaze. I'm not, you know, I'm, I'm not affirming enough. I'm too to the left. I'm too to the right. I'm just and in that way again, when I listened to Peterson, I thought, yeah, if everybody's shooting at you're probably doing something right. But, but what about the church like, do you have sort of any, you know, serious reforms you'd like the Christian reform church to to take in order to, you know, respond to the cultural moment or something like that. Or are you sort of, what was I going to say? Are you, you know, just sort of a moderate in spades or something? I mean, I, so, so before, before I had a, before I had a career as a YouTube celebrity, I was fairly active in the denominational heights of the Christian reform church. I, you know, was in denominational committees and all of that work and, and, and that's good and important work because when that work is done well, nobody notices it. And that's basically that that's how government should be. Government should, when government is really going well, nobody's actually noticing it just like good administration. But I think finally, the life of the church is found with people face to face, you know, belly to belly as a friend of mine says, one to another, looking to embody Jesus Christ to a suffering world. That's, that's, I, you know, at the beginning of the book of Acts, and you will be my, you know, now will you restore the kingdom to Israel? The disciples ask. Jesus completely sidesteps the question and says, the Holy Spirit will come upon you and you will be my witnesses. And, you know, if they had really thought about it, they said, well, wait a minute, let's see, you started this public ministry thing. You seem to get very popular in the Galilee. And then when you realize that everybody was just kind of had their hand out for miracles and free bread, you insulted them all. Then you marched down to Jerusalem, which was kind of a suicide mission. And, you know, you have that we had this really fun party marching into Jerusalem only to have the crowd turn on you and then wind up crucified. That's the plan. And we are going to bear witness to this plan. And Jesus said, oh yeah, the resurrection thing. And, okay, resurrection and then ascension. You know, we were hoping there'd be like 40 virgins or streets of gold or, you know, and this is the story. This is the, this is the, this is Christianity. So I, we get glimpses of, we get glimpses of glory and God's grace and power. And that's so often best seen face to face, eye to eye around a small people circle of people who are often, often struggling and in pain. And so I want to see God's, I want to see God's glory. And I see his glory so often in the midst of a world that's hurting. And there's nothing about if you read the Gospels or the New, the gospel, the New Testament, the Old Testament, the Bible, there's nothing surprising in that picture, because it looks like Jesus. And so Jesus is the paradigmatic. He is the, he is the, he is God, you know, there goes Sam. It's so funny because I am a Christian reform minister. This is what I do. And people are like, well, you're talking on YouTube. I just do on YouTube what I am and what I do and what I want to see is God's kingdom come and as will be done on earth as it is in heaven. That's what I want to see. There you go. Beginning of the Lord's Prayer, first line. Jesus said it all right there. So I just do it in this weird way. Wow. Yeah. It struck me while he was talking. It's kind of funny how making fun of Christianity is sort of apologetic for it. Like, like when you when you point out how stupid and absurd this whole story is it, it just becomes even more powerful. And that's why I love the end of that conversation with Eric Weinstein and Ross Douthat. Do you think if Jesus came again, like he'd be just memed into oblivion? That's basically what Eric was saying. And I was thinking, go ahead and try. You know, just, just, just Google image search Jesus and you'll find worlds of insanity. And that's where I love, I only brought it into one video, the Book of Beb. Let's see who wrote it. Was it Beekner that wrote the Book of Beb? Have you ever heard of the Book of Beb? I think I heard you talk about it. Yeah, I talked about it once. You should read it. You can read Lions, is it Lions country? Frederick Beekner, the Book of Beb. So, so here's the premise. There's a there's a guy in Florida running a diploma mill. And he's reputationally, he did a little time for molestation of children. And there's also this real creepy story out there of maybe he raised someone from the dead. And there's a there's a hotshot reporter who wants to try and build a career exposing this child molester in Florida running a diploma mill. And winds up, you know, and just and Beekner, Beekner has a way of saying, all right, yeah, go ahead. You know, just just just try to run Jesus through the mud, you know, and that's what happens in the crucifixion. You know, do your worst. You know, nail him to a cross, strip him naked, mock him. Go ahead. It's the story of silence. You know, the foomy is there and and and the you know, the Catholic missionary is just tortured and the foomy speaks to him and says, step on me. Go ahead. Mock me, memeify me, do your worst against me. Go right ahead. And I will still love you. And, you know, you can't you can't write a better story than this. It's why Jesus keeps coming back. Yeah, that's that's helpful because, you know, like one of the ongoing things I have, I struggle with is just the disconnect between my ideals for what I want the church to be and what what it actually is. And every time I sort of feel myself falling into that kind of, you know, despair, it's always really helpful to to just point the gun back at yourself. And, yeah, and realize, you know, the people Jesus calls you to love aren't these, you know, these these these Hollywood poor people who are super grateful and and and charming and delightful. You know, they're they're they're horrible, stupid people like yourself and and people are messy and that's that's Christianity. I still have a shit stain on my door from Daniel. And you wouldn't believe the amount of flies I have from Billy right outside my door. I talked to Billy yesterday. Billy, you're going to get a place to live because this isn't a good place to live. He says, Yeah, I know it. He says I'm number 67 on the list. So all right. Me and Billy going to be in this for a while. Yeah, I'm spending my pandemic. And then, you know, I talked to Daniel and and, you know, I help him out with something and he wants to give me a hug. He's like, Oh, yeah, six feet. But you know that the alcohol is just whiffing over me and I think if I could smell the alcohol on his breath, I suppose the COVID could hitch a ride. If the COVID can live through all the stuff he drinks. These are human beings. This is me. And, you know, yeah, I wear a shirt. I'm wearing pants and I got a YouTube channel and this continues to employ me. But, you know, I'm not much different from them. Really, I'm not. And that's us. And so, so how, you know, so this is why again post-modernity. Okay, so now I'm radically free and I can choose. And I say, Okay, you know who I choose to live like? I choose to live like that that pale Galilean. I choose to live like him. Well, what do you mean live like him? You're getting paid to, you know, and it's just absurd. But it's, it's, it's, there's potential for glorious absurdity. Yeah, yeah, I think that's, yeah, I love that. I love it. I mean, that that's a better apologetic to me than it's objectively certain that Jesus rose from the dead. We can prove it with history. Or science shows that that God is real and what have you. I mean, yeah. Sauron, Sauron, Sauron doubts Tolkien. Oh, okay. Sauron deconstructs Tolkien and proves to Middle Earth all there is his power. All right, go for it. Well, what are you thinking about these days? Well, you know, I'm, I'm so, so I, you know, I agreed, which is probably what I should have done. You know, I agreed to write a chapter in a book that a book project that for Vicky is working on and I thought, Oh, crap, now I have to write it. Because the thing is, you know, making YouTube videos for me as a lazy man's occupation because I just turn on the camera and talk and people watch and I still can't believe it's happening. But, you know, to write something now it's like, Oh crap, I got to sit down. I got to write this thing. But it's really good for me. I'm glad I said yes. And it's good for me because now I got to have a little self discipline. And oh, yeah, writing is tough. And, you know, people, you know, so I, you know, my last videos, I talk about myself being a dramatically unsuccessful pastor. And people often try to, you know, Oh, but pastor, don't worry about how I feel about myself when I say that because again, it's the absurdity of the gospel and my life. So I, you know, I was a foreign missionary and came, you know, part of what I learned as a foreign missionary and part of what, you know, part of what I learned as a foreign missionary was the absurdity that I thought, Here, I'm going to help these people. I'm going to help these people because I have a college education because I'm working for a very generous mission organization that has money to actually help people and how hard can it be to help people who are making 50 cents a day? I mean, well, you know, it's really hard because maybe you can, you know, pay them yourself. And where does that go? And, you know, and so during that portion of my life, I learned that, you know what, the idea that you can fix this world with money and power, it's a bad idea. So people are a lot more complex than that. So then I go back, I come back to North America and I come to this church and the whole classes at that point, all the pastors of the classes are going to go to Willow Creek with a team like the denomination is paying for it. And we're going to go to Willow Creek and we're going to learn from Bill Hybels how to make a prevailing church. So, oh, okay. Well, it's my job. So, you know, we come back and we try doing some of these Willow Creek things. And pretty soon I look around. It's like, this ain't never going to happen here. I got an untreated schizophrenic standing up in the back sleeping with his eyes open. You know, I got, you know, we are never going to pull off the big show to bring people in to pray the sinners prayer. It is just not going to happen here. And so we have this, I had a friend of mine, we have this little church retreat, all our church leaders. You know, we're supposed to have a mission statement and stuff. And so we start doing it. I'm looking at all we're doing. I said, yeah, we're summarize this, this, this, this church into three words. Dumpy can't be homey. And of course everybody's like, you can't put that as a, I said, but that's who we are. We're absurd. And so we just keep being absurd. And 20 years ago, I thought, this church isn't going to make it. And we're still not making it. But here we are. And so I just see a degree of the absurdity of, of so much in this world. And I get down to the point of saying, you know what, what am I going to do? I'm going to try to love, I'm going to try and do what Jesus says. I'm going to love my neighbor as myself all the way up to it, including my enemy and see where that goes. And, and the hardest people that you have to, as you well know, the hardest people that you have to love are often the people you live with. And because when you live with someone, well, lots of stuff comes up. Because they know, they know you pretty well and not the pretty, not the pretty face on YouTube. You know, they know all your hypocrisies and inconsistencies and the, and, and so it's like, so, you know, and so, okay, what am I going to do? You know what I'm going to try and do? I'm going to try and bear witness to Jesus as best I can. And I'm not that good at it. But, and so I'll encourage the people around me to do so too. And I'm obviously not that good at that either. And so, and by some strange quirk of history, thanks to Jordan Peterson, I'm now doing it on YouTube with randos. So you figure it out. It's absurd, but I love it. I recently reviewed a book on my blog called The Patient Ferment of the Early Church. Just thinking about your Willow Creek discussion. So it's written by this, by this guy called Alan Kreider and he starts off the book by listing some facts about the early church and he says, you know, the early church just basically didn't do any mission. They just, they didn't really go out of their way to tell people, you know, come to church, come pray the sinner's prayer, come, you know, come worship with us. And he says they, they didn't let people, didn't even let people like even watch their worship service. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. You couldn't just crawl into a church. Oh no. And then, and then when someone wanted to get baptized and join the church, they weren't too easy about that either. They had to go through this years long process before they could even, even join the church. But he says, and he also points out that, you know, the Great Commission, the early church didn't even use that as a, you know, sort of as a way of telling people to evangelize. That was sort of used as a Trinitarian groove text. So take that same, Adams. But, but he says, despite all of this, despite all of these opposite of church growth strategies, the church sort of grew anyway and slowly started fermenting and he just uses this metaphor of ferment and sort of to seep into the culture by the, to the point that, you know, by the fourth century you have Constantine wanting to get Christianity into, you know, to, to, to make it the state church. So, so he points out that basically the way the church grew was just by living faithful countercultural communities that attracted outsiders by the lives that they live. So yeah, I mean, that's a, that's a pretty good strategy for, for, for church growth in the, in the post modern world, I think, as well. But I think what, to get back to some of our, we can't hear. I don't know if our hearts can hear that sentence without a modernist ambition creeping in. Because we hear that and we think, okay, well let's organize ourselves and we'll, we'll really, we'll, we'll do it right this time. You know, one of the things I've worked with a lot of church planters and, you know, church planters are, I, God, I love them because they, they, you know, I'm going to, I'm going to do church right for the first time and I just love watching and, you know, they're all young and ambitious and they come in and they're, they're not going to do things the way they do. They're going to do things the way all people like me do stuff. They're going to do it right. So I just watch. The world just does to them what it does to all of us. And, and so when we say the patient fervent of the church, we're, and when we say patient, we mean like hundreds of years. And it's one of the things I really appreciate about the Orthodox Church because, I mean, they still got that in their system, to a degree. And so God bless them. But it's, you know, look at, let's say the, the Donatist controversy, because, you know, the church you just described is Augustine's church, and the Donatists look at them and like, ah, you're putzes, because you let those, you let those priests back who sold us out in the, you know, in the persecution. And, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and the fact that, you know, you can see Jesus embody all of this at once. Where on one hand, He's, He's more generous than the religious authorities think is responsible, but He's more demanding than the religious authorities think is responsible. And it's like, how do you do that, Jesus? How do you do that? Well, it gets you killed. And that's something that we don't tend to like that have happened to us. But Jesus does that. And that's something that to anybody who's paying attention reading that crazy book called the Bible continues to somehow inspire people to do the kinds of things that Christians do. So no, it's a great vision. And that's so Benedict option. It's no surprise that Rod Dreher went Orthodox and would imagine that well, the way out of our current miasma is patient ferment of small communities being very serious. Well, and we all know that those serious little communities can also get tyrannical and corrupt and all of those things too. Yeah, I mean, for me, becoming Orthodox would be, see, it's interesting to compare sort of, the hotter rights to the Orthodox because the Orthodox essentially, the way I understand them have the liturgy and this is where you sort of participate in the eschatological kingdom of God and you're eating the flesh of Christ and drinking his blood and you're participating in this heavenly reality. But the problem with the hotter rights is that we have somehow got it into our heads that you have to live the kingdom of God at all period of your, like at every, your whole life. So we sort of have this realized eschatology where you're sort of expected to live the kingdom in real life right now. But the problem of course is when you actually look at how most of us live our lives, it ain't look a lot like the kingdom of God. So the kingdom of God looks like dumpster welding and injecting in fields at sea time. No, it doesn't. It doesn't look like. It does and that's the crazy thing. There's a guy on Discord who made a tiny little video, he posted it on the Discord and one of the things, he had a line in that video that I heard it and I've thought about it like four or five times the last few days, I'm gonna have to clip it out and probably put it in a video. And this is where we get into God number one and God number two because, and this is where Sam and his resistance to the Trinity is wrong. There, Anselm, man, you heard me say it. Because here's the crazy thing with God number one, it's and the whole earth is full of his glory and him we live and move and have our being. So it's everything. And the part of what the, was at the heart of the story and the part of the Reformation was an attempt to get back to that because something of that had been lost in the corruption of the church. And so it is injecting the fertilizer into the field and welding the dumpster and it is all those things, but figuring out how and so this is where God, and what is more real this idea of God or the man, Jesus. I was just listening to, so I've done, I've just listened to Neil Gaiman's Norse mythology and thinking about that and thinking about why Odin is the way he is and the part that he plays in those stories, why he's an old man. And why his son is Thor and why, and then there's Loki and you begin to see all this and you can begin to understand how mythology works and this is part of what's really good with Peterson, but that God would become a man. And the reason that the church finally said, there's no shorting this, there's no shorting this. And there's a power in that move that you're not going to have if you, yeah, but all around it. And finally the church says, can we explain it? Well, here's a whole bunch of words and Greek ideas you can try, but explain. And CS Lewis, when it's in the book, A Severe Mercy, which is a great book anyway, Van Auken's book, but CS Lewis notes that, so in a platonic sense, the form of an apple is more real than an apple itself, but in another sense, an apple is more real than the form of an apple. And so Jesus is God, period. And there's something powerful right there that any way you try to short it, you're losing something. Yeah, I mean, I've been talking with Sam about this. I mean, like what is Christianity without the incarnation? And I was telling Sam like how the incarnation is just the most powerful and beautiful aspect of Christianity to me. And he just didn't see it that way. For him, it was such a weird, strange idea that God could become man. And he just, he sort of seemed to have an aversion to it. But. Of course he does, he was raised that way. But I look at this and I think those of us who are Trinitarians wouldn't have the opportunity to appreciate the splendor of the Trinity if Sam hadn't come in our midst and been so doggone stubborn. And we're not gonna hoist him with servetus and burn him at the stake. And it's an upgrade that we don't do that. Because I don't wanna do that to Sam because Sam's my friend. But, so Sam, even heretic Sam is a blessing, blessing to our little community. And this little corner of the internet as is John Vervecky, as is Seville King, as is Jonathan Peugeot. And so you asked me what I want in some ways, and again, I have to thank Jordan Peterson for this because he didn't give it to me intentionally. But because of what he did, I now, and in some kind of strange communion with you and Sam, and John Vervecky, and Anselman, and Mary, and Jonathan Peugeot, and I see Christ's hand in all of this, and it's beautiful, and I love it. Yeah, yeah. And so I, you know, I don't want a million subscribers. Part of me doesn't, part of me doesn't because what we're enjoying right now is a blessed small thing. And, you know, when I talk to, when I go to a meetup and meet someone I haven't met before, or have a rando call in, and I have no idea who's gonna be on the other end, it's like glory. Here it is, God plays in 10,000 places. It's the logic of the incarnation that you can encounter a place of gift anywhere. Like, you know, heretic Sam can be a gift to you, or, you know, talking with Luke is a gift, or every, yeah, every part of their created work can be a source of gift and wonder. Yeah, it's a beautiful idea. That's why I love the incarnation. Yeah, yeah. And it's real in a way that the idea of it could never be. And this is where you get, I mean, you know, Verveke has this 50 things of the meeting crisis, and when you're going through it, it's like, oh gosh, sometimes it gets deep and thick, and how am I gonna remember this all? But it gets in there, and every now and then something comes up, and it's, you know, the point between the finite and the infinite, that space between it, that's what makes things real. And so, you know, I love, you know, the old Eric Little story of, you know, this sprinter from Chariots of Fire who ran with his head back, and people say, why do you run with your head back? Because, you know, God made me fast, and when I run, I can feel his glory, something like that. And so when new people pop up, and they're, you know, like when you talk to Lars about trolls, and, you know, the Finns about their mythology, and I just get a sense of God's glory is all over the world, and here am I, aren't I, you know, how could I be so fortunate as to be able to do this and see this and have this? And it's no better place to be. Yeah, no, that's true. And success would in many ways destroy it with decadence. And so, you know, God bless little things, little failures, little churches, little communities. Yeah, we could talk about universalism because, just to shake up a little more shit. I have not read, you know, the thing about David Bentley Hart, you see now I'm gonna get into two seats, this is why, you know, this is why YouTube's gonna take me down. David Bentley Hart isn't a marginalized group. But the thing about David Bentley Hart is I can never, whenever I get the sense of listening to him talk, that he's so in love with the beauty of his words, which are in fact very beautiful, that he doesn't escape them. And so, you know, universalism. I have not read David Bentley Hart's book yet. There are so many good books to read and I'm a very selfish YouTuber. I talk to who I want to talk to and sometimes that means talking to people I don't know at all. And I read what I want to and I make videos like I want to. That's, I'm very, very selfish. Do you think the, Go ahead. Do you think the question of universalism has anything to do with the meaning crisis question? It has everything to do with, again, you know, like when I'm talking about the same sex marriage stuff, equality is really high in the American, in the Western, so justice. Okay, well, what do you mean by justice? Well, equality, okay. Well, there's a radical inequality about perdition. And this is the same, this is the same thing that triggers people when you say the word Calvinism. There's a radical inequality about perdition, but the Bible is unapologetic about some of these things. And the Bible doesn't care. You say, I don't like this. All right, you don't. It's there. You're not getting it out of the book. And so, you know, But it also has some, it also has some aspects that just push back against that inequality and make you, make you wonder, yeah, make you critique the inequality from within, I guess. Yeah, there's nothing more equal than dead. Is that the equality we want? Yeah, I mean, I mean, that's the, coming back to this Caputa thing, like, you know, it's such a totalizing, equalizing freedom that in the end, there's no particularity left. I wonder if that's the logic behind, you know, this language of liquid modernity, right? It's sort of such a, it just destroys, so all of these, a lot of these differences, you know, religion, nationality, culture, height, weight, sex, whatever it is. And to some degree, that particular difference is that which makes us human. It's not just, you know, is that which makes us human. It's that, that's where this incarnational gift can come from, you know, it's this diversity of creation, these particularities that, you know, that give life the richness that it does. And there's something flattening and anti-human about this totalizing freedom, which isn't the critique of universalism, but yeah, yeah. Well, Lewis has this great line, you know, his essay on democracy and equality. I think that's, again, that's just a fabulous essay because he notes that, and he talks about, you know, a lot of Lewis stuff is recycled through various of the things that he writes, but he notes that, you know, life is dramatically unequal in that the, I've used this illustration before, some of the most tasty food I've ever eaten was after Haitian church services, where, you know, the women of this church, while everybody's in there with three or four hours of church going in and out, because you can't sit through those services that long, but they're out there on a wood stove, they got a pot of rice, they got a few fish and some other spices. And some of that food that I had tasted in those villages is some of the best food I've eaten anywhere. And it's like, why would these desperately poor people know how to cook so well and enjoy, not very often perhaps, but enjoy the taste of that? You know, and Lewis points out that God, you know, God is very liberal and uneven in how he spreads blessings, that, you know, these, you know, how many of these poor people enjoy the, you know, the joy of sex or watching a child be born or, I mean, this stuff is just shot through throughout the world. And, you know, what he doesn't give us are the things that we think we really want, which we have in spades in the developed world, which are stability and food security, and, you know, long periods of life and good health and opportunity, you know. And so you look at that and you say, what's with God? And at the same time, I mean, we wouldn't even be having this if Jesus didn't himself seed in us the radical equality of, you know, you are all brothers and you have, you know, no master, you know, but one. And so again, Jesus comes along and Jesus gives us hierarchy and he gives us equality. And if you have eyes to see that in the gospels, you'll watch him playing with these ideas all the time. And again, that's why Peugeot was such a gift because Jonathan has ways of talking about this. I'll never be able to replicate, but we don't need to because we have a Jonathan Peugeot and we don't need to Paul Van der Klaas, that's for sure. Yeah, yeah. I mean, I think that's why, like, this was something I said on the voice chat the other day, but I think that's why Christianity isn't an ideology or a system or a set of beliefs as much as it is a way of life and a navigation of these paradoxes of equality and hierarchy and individual and community and all of these different tensions that sort of tug away at your soul. And you sort of have to go through life led by the spirit and sort of just find a feed for path through those tensions. And it's not going to look like some kind of watered down, middle way balance. It's going to, it could be that an extreme in one direction is the more faithful option in some circumstances. So yeah, I think that's what it's all about. And just look at the guys who lived on top of poles, it's like they're going to bear witness by living on top of a pole. There's room for them. And then you've got others who are bearing witness by Peter Thiel, Peter, boy, Peter Thiel wants to bear witness by being a venture capitalist. And being gay married and all of this. And we're all going to have ideas about, well, is it really a Christian to live on top of a pole? Is it really a Christian to be gay married? Is it, and but finally, as a Christian you say, hey, guess what? There's one judge that we all answer to and it isn't the court of public opinion. And at some point, just believe the mythological narrative as Caputo would call it, at some point, Paul VanderKlaas has to stand before the throne and give an account for what he did with however many years he got and the opportunities he was given in this world. And Paul VanderKlaas got to answer for that. And there's some things that I don't want to answer to, but I will. And- Yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's, yeah, that's where it comes down to the individual, right? Here's a bit of a question on the conversation you had on the same sex conversation. I wonder if there's, you were sort of talking to these people who sort of said, they have to leave their congregation because they're feeling, they can't in good conscience stay with the congregation that is going to go in an affirming direction. And so there's sort of this polarity between, this dualism between, are we going to affirm or are we going to not affirm? And I wonder if the conversation can, go in a different direction where it's not about, are we going to change our traditional teachings on sexuality, but rather what is the pastoral response to individual human beings who are same sex attracted in our conversations? Isn't that the conversation that we should be trying to have rather than these sort of extreme positions with, I mean, that's ultimately dualistic, impossible to resolve conversation because either you affirm or you don't affirm. But if you go to this middle ground of pastoral really dealing with these people, surely there's a lot more grace, grace space and a lot more room for discernment and a lot more room for agreement between two different factions in the church. It would be nice. The thing that happens is that the world devolves into basically prison politics where you're with this gang or you're with this gang. And if you show any signs of weakness, your own gang is gonna kill you. So, got to go to the other gang. I mean, this is the politics of a culture war, and I try to keep making this point in my sermons. This is the political atmosphere that Jesus did his ministry in. Absolutely, I mean, here's the thing about Jesus and how this connects to our current political climate. You know, if you're sort of a right-wing culture warrior and you're sort of seeing how our culture is getting more secular and how the LGBTQT crowd is sort of fighting for more rights and for same-sex marriage or whatever. Why did you put the queers ahead of the trans, Julian? What do you got against the trans? Sorry, I shouldn't interrupt. I didn't know the acronym had changed. I'm not up to date. L comes before G because the ladies come before the gay guys. LGBT, then the bi's, who a lot of the gays say are just really gays in denial, but you get into trouble to say that, even if you're gay. LGBT, then the trans, and then the queers, and you're against the queers. And anyway, go on, I'm sorry. I probably completely derailed your train of thought. But my point is, if you have sort of this narrative of here's our Christian civilization and suddenly we have this assault by these secular forces and these LGBTQT people, sorry, and what have you. You're sort of setting up this culture wars dynamic of these are the people that are my enemies in my quest to have a Christian society. And I think that's sort of exactly what happens in Jesus' context, where you have the Jews sort of trying to maintain their cultural identity within this pluralistic Roman society, and you have the culture warriors, and you have the hotter rights of the time. We sort of go hide in a cave, and then you have the revolutionaries. The patient ferment of the Essenes. Oh yeah. And then you have Jesus who says, who cares about your culture war? What faithfulness looks like is encountering human beings, and not treating people like political enemies or ideological opponents, but encountering these messy sinful human beings where they're at. And I just wish we could have that conversation instead of this. It just strikes me that our political polarization is making this an impossible conversation within our churches. And precisely at the moment where Christians need to have some kind of, need to show, need to witness to how our faith can make a difference in these conversations. Well, and this gets in some ways back to the institutional question, because Christians have to figure this out if they're running an institution. If they've got no power at all, well, then Christians just have to figure out whether they're going to conform or not conform, and willing to pay the price for nonconformity. I wanna talk about this issue. I'm probably gonna talk with Preston Sprinkle about this issue. He's been working on this issue for a long time, and he and I have been messaging back and forth a bit. And I think he and I are probably quite a bit on the same page. But again, in this particular political context, you're not gonna, it's the misery of the middle, where if you just decide, oh, let's affirm and be done with it, or let's dig in and I don't care. And in fact, we'll go Roman Catholic or Orthodox. They're not changing. I mean, they've made that abundantly clear. And so what's ironic is that if you go Roman Catholic or Orthodox, then you don't have to think about it. And people like, well, we want the church to, yeah, you're gonna get the church to what? Tordain women, good luck. But they've had all their own ways of dealing with it. Yet, Andrew Sullivan, who, few people were more successful in carrying the flag for same sex, for gay marriage, which sort of still, is Andrew Sullivan Roman Catholic? Well, sort of, and so is Joe Biden. And so all of these things are just different and weird. And so Protestantism, who knows how long Protestantism will last? The church has had, look at the Donatists. How long did the Donatists last? The church has had many little out groups. And we'll see what happens to Protestants. Who knows? I was thinking on this issue today, like with all of these big questions around sexuality and gender and family, or all of these big hot button cultural issues, I wonder if this is sort of going to be, how do you put it? Essentially, if, how the church deals with these questions will sort of determine where they end up in the long haul. And so I was reading, I'm reading some biographies on Pope Francis right now. Which is an interesting thing. Yeah, yeah, I love Pope Francis, which is probably going to disturb some more poop in the comment section. But. But Francis has been sort of controversial for opening up, for opening up discussion on the readmitting divorced Catholics into communion. That's the big issue. And I was reading in the biography on the synod he started up on around that issue. And I just love the approach he took where he sort of calls together these bishops, from all over the world. You have people from Africa who have their perspective. You have people from Germany, who's almost completely secularized. You have the Americans, you have the Italians. And then it brings it together then, hey, let's talk about these hot button issues. And when it comes to this divorce and remarriage question, you have sort of these two extreme groups developing. You know, the conservatives, this is a settled issue, we shouldn't even talk about this. And then the liberals just say, let's just let them into communion. This is no, yeah, we can deal with this. And then the author talks about how, as this synod progressed, as these people sort of hash out their differences, there sort of starts with a sort of middle ground starts to emerge where you're talking about, pastorally dealing with these people and dealing with a case by case basis on remitting them into communion. And I suppose as I was reading this, I thought, this is an issue that so many Protestant churches are completely at loggerheads with. And as we navigate these questions, is this the time when the more traditional Catholic or Orthodox churches will be vindicated for being able to find a path through these extreme positions and maintain their institutional stability while other institutions sort of laps into the right or into the left and become irrelevant. So. Well, you know, it's always helpful to remember that what happened with Protestants is that Protestants modulate institutionally in a different way than Roman Catholics. And that it's easy to think of, it's easier to track the Protestants because they all have little flags. Whereas the Catholics, it's all one thing, but all that stuff is going on under the surface. So Joe Biden's a Catholic, you know? You know, Jimmy Carter was a Protestant, you know, Southern Baptist, Bill Clinton was a Southern Baptist, you know. But. Obama and Trump were both Christians in. Donald Trump, reform Church of America, buddy, Norman Vincent Peel, Marble Cathedral, baby. That's Donald J. Trump's church. He has a Bible too, you know. So I get in trouble with that. We've disturbed enough church for one day. Julian, it's your spiritual gift. You're fertilizing the comment section as we go. So it's, yeah, yeah. But you know, part of what you can appreciate about the Orthodox and the Catholics is that they take, because of how they work institutions, they take very long views of things. And there's deep wisdom in that perspective. In ways that Protestants don't have. And you know, even our two traditions have more of that than, you know, happy, clappy, evangelical, independent church where, you know, that going on here and here's today and gone tomorrow, like the flowers of the field. Whereas the CRC and the Hutterites have been around a couple of hundred years. And have some institutional memories going back. And then we say, well, you know, we point back to those creeds still. And so we try to, you know, connect ourselves with the patristics to one degree or another. So yeah, and there's a wisdom in this sort of ballast that these, that the, I don't know enough about the, I mean, the Orthodox are such a new, such a new old thing on our church radars now. It's a strange thing. Yeah, yeah. Well, we've been going about two hours here, Julian. I don't know if you got any more things you wanna cover or if I should. Oh yeah, wow. Let's see. Well, you're gonna go for the record? I don't know what the longest conversation I've had is. We had a pretty long one in December. When was this? A year ago or a couple of months ago, I don't know. So. Well, I, you know, I, I don't know if this will be a wrap up or not, but I, again, I feel enormously blessed by, you know, YouTube and, you know, getting to, cause I remember, you know, the first time, you know, I talked to you and it's like, wow, this is wild. There's a, right from Manitoba and he welds. And I remember when I, I remember when I put out like a 10 minute video or something and you sent me a note, it's like, what's this 10 minute stuff? You know, the welders are looking for something here. How dare you put out a 10 minute video? Not worth downloading. But then, but then, you know, via the, you know, Joey puts together, Joey and Rick put together the discord and, you know, and I've, and that, and that we've been able to maintain a sort of a conversation over the last two plus years. And Jordan Peterson has sort of created enough of a space so that people can kind of find each other in the conversation and people stick with it. And another, you know, other people come into the conversation like, you know, like Luke and Jeff and Job and Sam. And of course, Esther's always out there. And, you know, it's just, it's to me, it's just a, it's just a good thing. And I'm just deeply grateful for you and how many others that have had a hand in it and have just made this just fun. So it's been cool. Oh yeah, yeah. It's, you don't realize how, just how terrific this space we've created until you go, you know, looking for other YouTube channels or other places to talk online. It's just, this type of conversation doesn't really exist in other places that I know of. And even hard to find in the church sometimes. Oh, totally, yeah. So I think, you know, for me, so yeah, so in all fairness to those who say, you're not dramatically unsuccessful because you've had a part in the creation of this, this is very much to me like the church because this isn't my creation. I had a part to play in it, but it's your creation and it's Joey's creation and it's Rick's creation and it's Sam's creation and it's Jeff's and Job's and how many people. And yeah, there's sort of a hierarchy in some things, but for the most part, it's just happening out there. And it's very church-like to me. And it includes heretics like Sam and, you know, non-theists like John Verbeke. And people with bad opinions like Esther. Oh boy, oh boy, am I gonna get messages from Esther after this one, she's gonna say, don't encourage Julian. It's not right that you encourage Julian that he should give up Kierkegaard and coffee with Kierkegaard. He needs his blog after that, Dane. Someday, Julian, someday you'll grow, you'll be grown old enough to become a young fogie and give up your childish Kierkegaardian ways. That's what she tells me. Well, I should bring this to a close and yeah, I'm glad we did this so that people won't worry that I'm under something heavy because I didn't do a video every day. A lot of YouTubers, you know, I talked to the Logos, the Logos made flesh guy, that dude does a video like he'll wait for months before he does a video. And it's like, wow. And he's like getting everything just perfect. And I'm like, boy, he and I are the opposite ends of the YouTube spectrum, baby. You're doing the patient ferment thing. It's like patient ferment on my channel. Violating all the rules of YouTube growth and yet paradoxically, this channel continues to slowly grow. I'm a little, you know, Benjamin Boyce had that thing about, I'm so glad I never monetized the channel because he had this little thing about, you know, this little checklist before he thinks about whether he's, you know, talking about marginalized groups. I don't know, I think Hutterites are marginalized groups. How many Hutterites are there out there? Are you feeling the pressure, huh? Are you feeling marginalized? I think someone else got it. Well, I think it's my son again. I don't know. Yeah, he's on your puppy. He looks tight. Yeah, I don't know what they're doing. They just put it there, so. Oh, is that his son? Oh, it's Dave. Yeah, I'm curious. That's Dave. Is that your son? Yeah. I'm sorry, bye. All right. Yeah, we should, I should go get some dinner. All right. Well, Julian, it's always a pleasure. And this is why I believe in the life of the age to come because I look forward to having you and many of the people that we're talking about or talking to and even about together for long conversations in the age to come. And I can't think of anything more fun, so. Yeah, bring it on. That's what I want. All right, Julian, you enjoy seeding those fields and doing all that injection you need to do. Yeah, I'm glad I could bring a bit of it to your YouTube channel, so. That's right. Well, you take care. It's good talking to you. Yeah, same here. Bye-bye. Later, Paul.