https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=3CT28f56OlE

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. If you want to see the final draft, you can find it on the church channel. I usually don't post my finished sermons here on this channel. The world is not right, in case you haven't noticed, and a lot of people feel that it's not right now more than ever. And those woes might be personal, your own hierarchy of personal woes, fears, and threats. It might be your health. It might be a family member in jeopardy. It might be financial insecurity. It might be dreams and desires that are blocked and never fulfilled. It might be the fact that death is inevitable and what it will mean for those that you leave behind. Or we can pan out further and look at other big problems in the world. We can find racism. We can have our fears of environmental collapse. We're in the midst of a global pandemic and they can't seem to burn bodies in India fast enough. There's fears of financial collapse. The government pumping all of this money. Is it going to destabilize? Will cryptocurrencies replace? What would that mean for the country and the government? War, civil unrest, revolution. The world is not right and we sort of feel now more than ever. That's sort of a hard argument to make. Any guesses what this is a picture of? It's actually a very famous picture. The guy in the fuzzy picture over to the right is Abraham Lincoln and he is reading his second inaugural address after he was, well, it was sort of easy to get voted in with the South gone in this case. And the Civil War is nearing its conclusion. have been battling for nearly four years and he is about to read an inaugural address. What kinds of things might he include in it? Might he talk about the problematic people down south of the border, those evil slave owners who have been very brutally hurting people on the basis of their race for a few hundred years and what might this speech include? I'll just read some parts of it. Both read the same Bible and pray to the same God and each invokes his aid against the other. It may seem strange that any man should dare to ask a just God's assistance in wringing their bread from the sweat of other men's faces, but let us judge not that we be not judged. This man is talking in the middle of a Civil War being fought at this point over slavery. And that's what he says. Can you imagine a politician from either party extending this kind of generosity to the other over anything as dramatic as the brutality of American slavery? The prayers of both could not be answered. That of neither has been answered fully. The Almighty has his own purposes. Woe unto the world because of offenses, for it must needs be that offenses come, but woe to the man by whom the offense cometh. Every now and then you'll hear someone quote the Bible in a speech, never a verse as obscure or actually incredibly applied as this one. If we shall suppose that American slavery is one of those offenses, which in the providence of God must needs come, but which having continued through his appointed time, he now wills to remove and that he gives to both north and south this terrible war as the woe due to those by whom the offense came, shall we discern therein any departure from those divine attributes which the believers in a living God always ascribe to him. I can't imagine a contemporary president trying to deliver a sentence like that. Never mind the contents of that sentence, which basically say in God's providence, somehow we got slavery and now in his appointed time, both north and south are suffering this terrible war as punishment for it. It's not, it's all their fault and their due the punishment. This is all our fault and we're all due the punishment. Fondly we hope, fervently we do pray, that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away, yet if God wills that it continue until all the wealth piled up by the bondsman's 250 years of unrequited toil shall be sunk until every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid by another drawn with the sword as was said 3000 years ago. So still it must be said the judgments of God are true and righteous altogether. Can you comprehend that sentence that in fact, well maybe this is God's punishment on the entire nation and we will declare that it's just even if every drop of blood is shed. And then he says these words, which are absolutely astounding, with malice towards none and charity for all, with firmness in the right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in, to bind up the nation's wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and his orphan, to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations. This was given on March 4, 1865, 41 days before Good Friday when he was killed. The war ends, Reconstruction falters and yields Jim Crow. A hundred years later nonviolent civil rights movements yield legislation which undo Jim Crow legislation. But is the world ever set right? With malice towards none, with charity for all, I don't think Abraham Lincoln's address would be tolerated today, much less reproduced. Lincoln didn't go to church much, but he certainly knew his Bible. Jesus approaching Jerusalem saw the city and wept over it and said, if you, even you, had only known on this day what would bring you peace, but now it is hidden from your eyes, hidden from the eyes of those who wanted to stop Jesus and hidden from the eyes of those who are cheering him on. The days will come upon you when your enemies will build an embankment against you and encircle you and hem you in on every side. They will dash you to the ground, you and the children within your walls. They will not leave one stone on another because you did not recognize the time of God's coming to you. These texts seem to speak to us from another world. But yet we want to change our world. It was about a year ago that I started in on the Sermon on the Mount and we talked about Game B, how can we save the world from ourselves and all the calamities that we face. I took a picture of the empty sanctuary because I was doing videos right here from my chair. How can the world be changed? Why doesn't Jesus just snap his fingers like some non-purple Thanos? Sunday, 25 June 1967 in St. Woods Church, one of London's most affluent neighbors, churchgoers were heading to Evensong. For those of you who don't know Anglican practice, that's sort of an evening worship service. Not the world's most famous band though. The Beatles were booked to play their largest gig ever. For the first time a program featuring live sequences from different countries was to be broadcast simultaneously around the world to 350 million people. That's a huge audience. John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr, the studios on Abbey Road were where for the past five years the Beatles had been recording the songs that had transformed popular music and made them the most idolized young people on the planet. Now before an audience of 350 million they were recording their latest single, the song with a chorus that anyone could sing was joyously, catchily, anthemic. Its message written on cardboard placards in an assortment of languages was intended to be readily accessible to a global village. Flowers, streamers and balloons all added to the sense of party. John Lennon, alternatively singing and chewing heavily on a wad of gum, offered the watching world a prescription with which neither Aquinas nor Augustine nor St. Paul nor Abraham Lincoln apparently would have disagreed. All you need is love. Doesn't seem to be a secret. Why is the world still such a mess? Many people will agree love is what we need but when applied, how applied, to whom it should be applied and it seems spoken of in public, it's increasingly unwelcome. We don't trust it. We don't trust love, really. The world is God's vineyard and last week we looked at the beginning of John 15 where those who bear fruit get pruned and those who don't get cut off and thrown into the fire. All of us get to know the gardener's blade. He is pruning, cutting and burning. Think about the battle of the republic where the grapes of wrath are stored. He is pruning, pursuing an aim, the fruit he desires. If you missed the vineyard metaphor, read Isaiah 5, 1-7. He is ruthless in his passionate pursuit of fruit. He will spare no cost. The Gospel of John, verses 13-16 we sort of went over last week. Jesus begins by enacting the message by stripping down, wrapping a towel around himself and washing his disciples feet, much to their horror. And he says, one of you will betray me. Satan is in him. What do you mean by that? I'm leaving you. You can't follow me right now. It's good I'm leaving. Someone is coming that will turn you into me and your life into my life. Wrap your head around that. You know more than you know you know. You have seen me. You have seen the Father. You know the way even though you don't know. You know the way. If you love me, you will keep my commandments. As the Father has loved me, so I have loved you. What do you need to know? You've seen it. You know it. Abraham Lincoln knew it. The Beatles know it and they sing it. The words are all there. If you keep my commandments, if you become like me, you will remain in my love, just as I have kept my Father's commands and remain in his love. But we sort of see this and sing all you need is love and marvel at the second inaugural address, but now wait a minute. If the Father loves the Son so much, why would he send him into this world? Does that communicate love? You're going to be born a small Jewish baby in a world of a vicious culture war, of the underclass beneath the heavy Roman boot. There will be no antibiotics. There will be no modern medicine. Angels will not bail you out of a jam. That looks like love, Father. Now Jesus is sending his disciples from his sheltering power into this world and just as this world will cost Jesus his life, this world will cost the disciples theirs. Nearly all of them will die, not of natural causes. James, part of Peter, James, and John, the big three at the center of the circle, will be one of the first killed within not too many years. Now in Greek, this word love in the Gospel of John here is agape. And my friend who is a non-theist and teaches cognitive science at University of Toronto in his Awakening from the Meaning Crisis course gave a description of agape that many of us that put to shame many of us Christians, especially preachers, because he showed what should have been obvious, that this kind of agape, self-donating love actually already makes the world go around. The physical baby born into the world, that child will not become fully human without the sacrificial love of the mother, of the father, of the village, of the community, sacrifice after sacrifice, time, money, attention. The baby's bottom is dirty, the baby needs to feed, the baby needs to be read to, the baby needs new shoes, the baby needs an education, on and on and on, the parents sacrifice. Will it be made up for? Will it be gratefully received? There's nothing less grateful than a newborn baby. Agape is the self-donating love that brings people individually and collectively to their agentic potential. They grow in their agency, they become powerful, they become giving, they become the kinds of human beings we were made to be by virtue of love from another. It happens with babies, it happens with people. Love is all you need. Love makes the world go around with malice towards none and charity towards all. Charity was the 19th century way of saying love. I have told you this so that my joy, that sort of cara, caress, joy, may be in you, that you might experience the joy I have and that your joy may be complete. In the book of Chronicles, King David, now old and advanced in years, hands down the kingdom to his son and pulls out all the stops for celebration. David said to the whole assembly, praise the Lord your God. So they all praised the Lord and fell prostate before the Lord and King. The next day he offered thousands upon thousands of sacrifice and they all ate and drank with great joy. This is the joy the parent sees and feels when their child is coming into their potential. All the sacrifice has been worth it. All of the hopes and dreams are coming to realization. That is joy completed, joy fulfilled and Jesus says love one another so that my joy may be in you. So you can feel the joy that I'm about to feel as you become me, as you do greater things than I'll do. That's the joy I want and the way this happens is agape, love. That's how this happens. That's the vehicle for the world to change. Everybody knows the word, but application? My command is this, love each other as I have loved you. Greater love has no one than this, than to lay down one's life for one's friend. You are my friends if you do what I command. They tell me that soldiers really aren't fighting for their country. They're fighting for each other because the kinds of love that soldiers have for each other, it's not erotic love. It's the love that they lay down their life for each other and even years later after the battles, that's what they profess to. This is what love looks like. It looks like the mother who lays down her life for her child, the father who gives to his child who lays down his life, maybe not in some dramatic life ending moment, but bit by bit, dollar by dollar, minute by minute, minute by minute, minute, moment by moment, and as every parent will attest, that drive stays in us. As the old saying goes, you'll never be happier than your most miserable child. That's what that love is like. No longer do I call you slaves. Wait a minute. Disciples are slaves? Sort of. But because the slave does not know what the master is doing, the slave is an extension of the master. The slave has no agency. The slave does not know. The slave is barely human. In fact, the slave is considered to not be human. In Roman law, once you became a slave, the marriage and property that you owned or dissolved, you're no longer human. Jesus now says you're no longer non-human. But I call you friends. And in the Roman world, friend. Well, that was a powerful thing. Because friends can ask things of each other. Friends listen to each other. Friends open each other up to influence from each other. I no longer call you slaves because the slave does not know what his master is doing, but I have called you friends because everything that I have heard from my father, I revealed to you. Everything. All this little data we think we want the information. And Jesus says, no, love is all you need. Really? Love is not simple. We don't always know how to love, but love is all you need. You will not choose me. You did not choose me. It's quite factual, he chose them. But I chose you and appointed you that you should go and bear fruit. Oh, the vineyard theme is coming up again. And your fruit should remain in order that whatever you ask the father in my name, he will give you. You're part of the friendship circle now. These things I command you that you love one another. There it is. There's the key. Washington knew it. The Beatles knew it. Talk to just about anybody on the street. They know it. They say they know it. We know it to a degree. Well, why don't we do it? Well, because of what it costs. We remain in the age of decay for a time. This is our sojourn. 41 days after the second inaugural, Lincoln is assassinated. All you need is love. But were the Beatles just talking about romance? Does it go any deeper? Because Jesus and his disciples have changed the world. They've in fact changed the world so much and not been conscious of the intellectual property so that when you say all you need is love, trademark Jesus. No, that's it's just the way it is. Except we don't do it. Do we? Why not? Every parent knows there's a limit to the attention. There's a limit to the time. There's a limit to the money. And when we don't pay it, our children suffer. Yet we don't. We're not as good as we think we are. Jesus is the example. He's about to show them everything they need to see and still they won't get it. In your relationships with one another, have the same mindset as Christ Jesus, who being in very nature God did not consider equality with God something to be used to his own advantage. Rather he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a slave. Being made in human likeness and being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross. And so, we're not as good as we think we are. We're not as good as we are on a cross. Love is dying for each other. Often it's little deaths. It's time. It's money. It's attention. But that's what it is. That's the deliverance. Love is all you need. It is in loving by being loved that we are transformed. It's both. Because the transformation of being loved, even in our ingratitude, we grow. But we hit a stage where there has to be a transition. And instead it's not I need to be loved. It's I need to love. And the more I love, the more I will be transformed. There will be little deaths and strange little lives at the same time. It is in loving that we are transformed. The agency we grow into in this radical life is giving agapic love. Our agency grows as God's agapic love agency grows in and through us. It's God's love. Because Jesus did this, he is coronated king. King forever. Solomon had his flaws. Therefore God exalted him above the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth and every tongue acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father. The Father seeing the Son fulfill the love, the costly love. It was the love of the Father by which the Son comes and the Son passes that love to his disciples and his disciples pass that love to the next and on and on and on and on in the great chain of love for the world. Love one another as I have loved you. One of my favorite examples of this is from Cory Ten Boom's The Hiding Place. They pass that love to Jews during the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands by hiding them and they were discovered and so subjected to the prison camp and in that camp the guards took Cory Ten Boom's beloved sister's life and laughed and mocked. After the war Cory Ten Boom went all around Europe preaching about forgiveness, forgiving Nazis? Why don't, why, why should they deserve to be exterminated just like they did to the Jews? I continue to speak partly because the Holman Blumen, Blumen doll ran on contributions partly because the hunger for Betsy's story seemed to increase with time. I traveled all along Holland to other parts of Europe to the United States but the place where the hunger was greatest was Germany. Germany was a land in ruin, cities of ashes and rubble but more terrifying still, minds and hearts of ashes. Just across the border was to feel the great weight that hung over that land. It was a door, it was a church service in Munich that I saw him, the former SS guard who had stood guard at the shower door in the processing center at Ravensbruck. He was the first of our actual jailers that I had seen since the time and suddenly it was all there, the room full of mocking men, heaps of clothing, Betsy's pain blanched face. He came to me as the church was emptying, beaming and bowing, how grateful I am for your message Fraulein. He said, to think as you say he has washed my sins away. Those sins? Those sins? No, they're sins that can't be washed away. Sins of slave owning, sins of racism, sins of genocide, sins of extermination. Certainly Jesus' blood does not go to that degree. Certainly no one would blame Corey for saying, for you no forgiveness. His hand was thrust out to shake mine. And I who preach so often to the people in Blumendal the need to forgive kept my hand at my side. Even as the angry vengeful thoughts boiled through me, I saw the sin of them. Corey, your sins are nothing like his. Jesus Christ had died for this man. Was I going to ask for more? Lord Jesus I prayed, forgive me and help me to forgive him. I tried to smile, I struggled to raise my hand, I could not. I felt nothing, not the slightest spark of warmth or charity. And so I again breathed the silent prayer, Jesus I cannot forgive him. Forgive him. Give me your forgiveness. As I took his hand, the most incredible thing happened. From my shoulder, along my arm and through my hand, a current seemed to pass from me to him. While into my heart sprang a love for this stranger that almost overwhelmed me. It would have been easier if he had been a stranger. And so I discovered that it is not for our forgiveness anymore than our goodness that the world's healing hinges. But on his, when he tells us to love our enemies, he gives along with the command the love itself. With malice towards none and charity for all, with firmness in the right as God gives us to see the right. Let us strive on to finish the work we are in to bind up the nation's wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and his orphan. To do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations to finish the race for joy by love.