https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=MfRi0YwKZR0

 This morning I just published a video in which I critiqued William Lane Craig's presentation at the Wycliffe College event with Jordan Peterson and I said that I didn't particularly find the argument that there can be no meaning that's not attached to eternity as compelling. I think that's true, but I said I didn't necessarily find it compelling and I didn't necessarily see a lot of materialists or non-Christians or naturalists finding that compelling. And then this morning I'm listening to a Veritas forum between Tim Keller and Anthony Kronman who I'd never heard of and this is what Kronman says. In a famous lecture of his entitled Science and the Science of the Universe, he declared that we live today in a disenchanted world by which he meant that the gods and belief in the gods or in God has become an entirely private matter, has disappeared from the realm of commonly accepted norms and public life. He was perfectly aware that there are still many professing believers, churchgoers, but Weber thought that the deepest tendencies of our entire civilization were pressing in the direction of pushing God further and further and further into the recesses of private life where one might choose to believe or not. And he recommended a kind of stoical resignation in the face of that fact. He said God has vanished, you may believe or not, that's up to you, but as a public matter gone, gone, gone, you've got to suck it up and accept that fact as your fate. For a long time, in my 20s and 30s and 40s and 50s, I said that's right and I can live a stoical life of that kind and then it just stopped working for me. And the reason it did, I think I can put very simply, it became clearer and clearer to me that the meaning of my life, the meaning of my commitments, my attachments, my, of my vocation, my worldly vocation, couldn't for me be ultimately secured in a way that would be entirely satisfying and personally convincing unless I could relate all of that, my life, to something that is not touched by time. The word for that is eternity, but it's a word that isn't often used, well certainly at the Yale Law School these days, but I came to believe that unless I could work out for myself an understanding of how my life and all that it contains is connected to something that never comes into being and never passes away, but endures as scripture says from age unto age, unless I could work all of that out for myself, though in the non-scriptural terms, that I really wouldn't be at home in my life, let alone in the world. And so that's why I was moved to sit down and think things through from the start and write the book that I did. And I heard that and I thought of, yeah, I thought of a lot of people who have commented on my videos and written me letters and I noted how many, even though Peterson talked about the fact that there's a little executive airport by me so there will be plane noises, I noted how many, even though Peterson talks about, say, young men in his audience, I was initially surprised to find out how many middle-aged men there were dealing with this and men coming to me in their 40s and 50s and some into their 60s and 70s who have reached this point. And so I thought those comments were important and I'm going to play a little bit more of it. I'm going to give you Tim Keller's opening remarks, which I thought were also excellent and germane to the subject. Yeah, I also thank you for bringing me here, though it's not fair to call us two intellectuals. Tony is a real scholar. I am a popularizer of scholarship. That's what a good preacher does actually. And I completely agree with what Tim Keller has to say there. Sometimes people say, well, you're a theologian. Well, I'm not really a theologian. I see theologians as scholars. I am a preacher and a pastor. And so in a sense, I work on the shoulders of theologians and scholars, but it's a distinct role. But I'll tell you, as time goes on, we're going to see that Tony's understanding of the character of God in mine as an orthodox Christian minister is different. But here I'm happy to join with him in the critique of the idea that there's nothing outside of time. I guess you could call it secular materialism. It would be the idea that not only is there no God, but there's actually no transcendent aspect to reality at all, which is what the ancient pagans and eastern religions believe. There's no transcendent aspect. Everything is time. It's in time, and therefore everything has a physical material cause. And I think when we when we start looking at Peterson, I think that distinction with what Keller made there, I think Peterson is still within time. Again, people sometimes challenge me on my calling him an agnostic. I think most the most accurate way to describe him is to say, we can't know that there's something outside of that. An atheist would say there isn't anything outside of that. An agnostic would say we can't know that there's there's something outside of time. We can't speak about that. And I think that then gets into Peterson's framework of how it develops. That view, I also agree completely, has got huge problems. You may not know that if you're walking around Yale studying here, but there are some problems. I would be a little less personal and say here's two. The one is actually the question of moral value and moral norms. The secular approach, there's nothing but time, essentially says that there is no moral source outside the self for any moral values or norms. So all moral values are either culturally constructed, socially constructed, or they're products of our evolutionary biology or they're a personal choice. But there's no there's no eternity. There's no cosmic. There's no basis for values outside of myself. Now what that does in the end is to say, I think, that the good, the true, and the beautiful, the old transcendentals, are really there's no way to determine them other than you just determine them for yourself, which means there's no way to have a conversation. The good ends up becoming what the majority who has all the power say it is. And there's no way you even have a conversation. And I think Keller's point here is an important one. I had to move myself so I'd get out of his face. Keller's point here is an important one. And I think, again, as per my last video about William Lane Craig, Jordan Peterson, and C.S. Lewis, I think this is precisely part of what Jordan Peterson is this is what Jordan Peterson is trying to address with his project to say that we can talk about the good and the true and the beautiful, but yet he's not willing to go outside of time. He says we are we can in a sense go beyond our heads and beyond human projection we can say that this is built into us from the lobsters on and that this is older than the trees, but it is functionally still a product of time within the temporal sphere. And he is agnostic in terms of saying we can go beyond that to other things. There's no higher moral ground. You can't say as the I'm trying to do everything I can to be in unity here with Tony at this point. You can't say with the Greek philosophers that there is a true and a good and a beautiful beyond time and that through contemplation and discussion we can discern it. No, basically the good of whatever I say it is. Ultimately the good is a matter of belief, I would say. It's not a matter of empirical reason. So it creates a huge problem. We're having it right now in our society. There's no ability for us to talk just to yell, just to have power blocks say this is what I say the good is and there's no way to even have a discussion, nothing to appeal to because there's no there is no source, a moral source outside the self. The second has to do with the meaning. And again before he gets to meaning, I just reiterate what I just said. I think Peterson would say there is a source outside the self and this is why Peterson's work is important because right now on the menu we kind of have the the new age community that says there's kind of a secret self, a self that I'm alienated from and perhaps I can find through meditation or through my feelings and then the secret self then it's my duty to manifest that self. So as I've said before this gets played out in let's say gender identity that my secret gender identity is Shirley Temple and no one can challenge that secret gender identity because I and only I know it and I must be true to myself so from now on regard me as a 1930s child star who sings and taps dances. And so Peterson is very much against that as are the other materialists. They are much more they are materialists, they are within time but Peterson wants to say no there's we can talk about these things apart from the self and again Peterson wants to say that these in fact are built into the world in terms of evolution and Darwin explains this along with other you know there's been a lot more work since Darwin obviously in terms of understanding evolution. So that's where Peterson's conversations get interesting with for example the Brett Weinstein. So this is where this is going and so in a sense Keller is right in terms of talking about let's say perhaps Sam Harris. I don't think he's necessarily applicable in terms of talking to Jordan Peterson. This is where a conversation between Jordan Peterson and Tim Keller in my opinion would be a pretty interesting one. And I'll let me get I agree completely with Tony let me just add another approach to it. If there's no meaning outside of time then you're going to have to find your ultimate meaning in something here like success or money or even family or love. You're going to have to build all of your your ultimate meaning will have to be something inside this life. And this is where I think Tim Keller is is now addressing Jordan Peterson because if you saw the last video did in terms of where you find meaning Peterson is saying you can find meaning in your family. You can find meaning in your job. You can find meaning in your work. Now if you listen to enough of Tim Keller you'll know that he will say yes and in fact that then becomes a form of idolatry because if you make your greatest meaning in your work or your greatest meaning in your family or your greatest meaning in anything in this world then that will crush you. And then suddenly the other guys address becomes relevant because what what what Keller will say is that the only safe place to actually locate your ultimate meaning is beyond this frame and you you locate it in the heavenlies because actually the only the only if you if you give all of your allegiance to a woman let's say and or your spouse that spouse can crush you. How do you know that that spouse is worthy of all your meaning. How do you know that that spouse won't use this radical allegiance to crush you. This is where obviously the MGTOW community goes and says yeah I gave all my meaning to a woman and that woman you know took me for all my money and raked me over the coals. And of course that happens every day and men do it too. You give all your meaning to a child that in fact it's not healthy for that child to have all that meaning. And in fact Peterson will will critique that too. You cannot make your child your idol or pretty quickly you're not going to be able to say no to your child. And if you can't say no to your child you're going to deform that child. And Tim Keller goes along these lines in some of his books and in many of his sermons because he says finally you can find meaning in your work. You can find meaning in your studies. You can find meaning in your job. You can find meaning in all of these places. And in a sense Peterson might say well it's perfectly legitimate to make your career your ultimate meaning. And Tim Keller would say no. It's it's unwise to do so because you might invest your whole life in turn into working for Google. And what will Google do for you. I am now in my 54 years old and I can't tell you how many men I know. I live in northern California so there's a lot of tech industry around. And I can't tell you how many men I know got into their 50s and the tech industry basically said boy I can I can find someone a whole lot cheaper to work for me than than you will. And so boom you're done you're out. If you give your life to Intel Intel will not die for you. And this is where Tim Keller then goes and says and this is what Christianity has to offer because you give everything to a god. But this god dies for you. And so in fact your ultimate allegiance is safe with him. And if you put your ultimate allegiance in him all of your other relationships are then in order. They are properly sorted. They are. And this Tim Keller is basically following Augustine in this who is the great Western theologian. If you you need to put first things first. C.S. Lewis will talk about the same thing. But first things first. And so love the Lord your God with all your heart soul mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself. But do the one first. And the reason you can do the one first is because that one will not be abusive. Now some of you will say yeah but religions can get abusive and yes they can. And pastors can get abusive and churches can get abusive. And so you're going to have to modulate that. You're told to love God above all not your pastor or your church. OK. And that gets a little slick I know in terms of American evangelicalism when people get disconnected from their church. You've got to hold these things in balance. But this is this is the conversation and where it goes. I should let Tim Keller finish because he'll say a lot better than I will. And I'll put the link down in the notes so that you can see the whole video. All of your meaning in life will have to come from something inside this life and this life will take all those things away eventually. All of those things away. I read an anthropologist some years ago who said the secular culture gives its members less resources fewer resources to deal with suffering than any other culture in history. And here's the reason why every other culture which was a religious culture in some way always said the true meaning of a human life is something outside of time. Just what Tony just said. So if you're a Hindu the meaning of life is to live a life so that you can eventually get off the cycle of reincarnation and get into eternal bliss. If you're a Buddhist the meaning of life is to overcome the illusion of this world. You know if you're a Jew or a Muslim or a Christian Orthodox you think there's the key is to please God and and and to be with God forever. In other words suffering in every other religion every other culture can actually enhance your your meaning in life. It can drive you suffering can actually drive you more into it. If your real meaning in life frankly is the love of God and the please God and you've gotten onto the the treadmill of success and something happens financially and you have a failure that can drive you more into the real meaning of your life which is to please God not to become successful. But if you don't have anything outside of time frankly suffering destroys your meaning in life in a way it doesn't in any other culture. So yeah in the end there are huge problems with living in a disenchanted universe and Tony and I agree that it doesn't really work that in the end even though we're being careful and saying it can work for a lot of people for a while it doesn't work for us. I being a good Christian minister I go so far as to say it's not true. The universe is enchanted and to live in a disenchanted universe is not only not functional but you're out of touch with reality. So I'll stop it there if you want to watch the whole video. The link will be in the notes but I had to make my apology to William Lane Craig and to all of his fans out there some of you I'm sure were have already commented are ready to comment and I thought that this Veritas Forum video would be helpful to a number of you that I've been talking to and I hope it is.