https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=HJn_c30zptI

 Did you want me to, so we're going to do it simultaneously. I don't know if you have a little introduction you want to do or not. I even or maybe we should all introduce ourselves. Yeah, we could do that. Maybe we want to call it like the joint between past and future with Paul van der Kley or something and just each go around and introduce ourselves real quick. I guess people on your show probably know you a lot better, but we're fairly new, so we might need to intro it a little bit. Right. Yeah, I usually do a fair amount of intro on my channel because I find people listen to each other a little bit better if they have a sense of their story. They don't tend to get so dogmatically reactive about an idea if there's some context. Is it recording or should we start it? I started recording. You can always edit. I can. I can. I set Raj to be able to record, but I don't know if I can do it for two. Yeah, it looks like we're recording over here. Okay. Yeah, I think as long as you can record, we're probably good. I don't see any button here that says, oh wait, no, that's mute. Never mind. I don't see any record button on my end. Okay. I've always got a copy and I could send the copy to you too. It's not a big deal. Yeah, I think we'll be fine. I see. So, do you want to get started? Yep. Well, my name is Paul VanderKlay and I'm a pastor at Livingstone's Christian Reformed Church. I have a YouTube channel. I started a local meetup to discuss the work of Jordan Peterson a couple of years ago. And even though we don't talk about Jordan Peterson much because he hasn't done much, that's where I met Raj. And we just talked about a lot of interesting ideas when we get together. And Raj told me he was doing a podcast with a friend, Ethan, I'd never met before. So, I asked if I'd be willing to go on it. He said, sure. I'd give him a chance to get their podcast up and running. So, here I am. Not sure what we'll talk about today, but all my conversations with Raj are very, very interesting. So, I'm sure it'll be great. I'm looking forward to it. And thanks for giving us this opportunity, Paul. Hi, I'm Raj. I'm really interested in religion. I got a BA and an MA in religious studies. I actually just finished up with my thesis and I was on American civil religion, but I'm a practicing Sikh. I also live in Sacramento. And, yeah. Oh, Ethan and I met while working, while an undergrad at Bard College. I'm Ethan. I live in Brooklyn right now. I work at a brewery. I'm not really too involved. This podcast is really the only thing I'm involved with besides, like, any sort of political or work like that. I went to Bard and kind of didn't really like it too much. So, I took like a little break of dealing with politics and thinking about other stuff to, like, kind of reflect, step back. And then me and Raj were always interested in just talking about the general political environments. We decided to come back and do this podcast. And I had never heard of you, Paul, before Raj mentioned you. So, I've watched some of your videos, done some research. And, yes, hopefully we'll have some good things to talk about. Cool. So, Ethan and I are both pretty interested in the rise of wokeism, woke ideology. We saw it firsthand while we were at Bard. And I know that you're pretty aware of what's going on with that, Paul. I was very interested in this idea that you see wokeism kind of as a Christian heresy, along with the heresy of kind of prosperity gospel on the other side of the political spectrum. And I guess the question is, how does one deal with a heresy? And where do we sort of, because I think that this is something we can get into maybe a little bit later on in the conversation. But it seems to me that one of the aspects of the heresy is this focus on God, too, at the expense of God, one. But yeah. Could you, just for, so I'm not really too into the religious stuff. Could you maybe define the God, one and two thing and what you mean by heresy real quick? Those are two excellent questions. So heresy is a word that there's orthodox, which is straight, ortho. Orthodontist makes your teeth straight. Heterodox means it's going in all different directions. And so what to me a heresy is, at least within the Christian sphere, is an idea that comes out of the church somewhere. So it's an idea that is sort of birthed within the community. But it brings the community in a different direction and finally in a self-destructive direction. A heresy is, I get this from a book by Alistair McGrath, who is an English scholar, wrote a little book on heresy. It's basically an idea that will eventually lead to the dissolution of the community and the coherence of the belief framework. That's, in my opinion, what a heresy is. Orthodoxy is straight. And so it, orthodox beliefs help a community to continue the thread of the religion. Because, I mean, everything as you go through time. So a heresy is almost like straying from the righteous path in a way. It's a bad turn. It's a bad turn. And obviously it's a value judgment. You don't know in the moment if an idea is going to lead you astray or not. It's usually only within, especially in something like a religious community, large amounts of belief are going to be lost in time, whereby it eventually becomes obvious that this idea was a bad choice, even if it was made centuries before. And so at some point then there's a correction. Usually in a religious community there's a body of beliefs, there's a certain authority structure. And if an idea is found outside of that body of beliefs or a competing body of beliefs, there'll be tension and people will work it through. So this is the orthodox belief. Other people say that's the orthodox belief. But over time, usually it's sort of a Darwinian approach to communities and thought and ideas. So a heresy is something. Oh, sorry. It's like a maladaptive turn for the tradition. Right. And it will eventually mean the destruction of the tradition and especially the community, which is a heresy. And so that's a heresy. Now, my God 1 and God 2 nomenclature, I developed in watching Jordan Peterson talk to Sam Harris, because at the end of their first conversation it became clear they had two different definitions of what each meant by God. And Jordan Peterson had an idea which I think was far older. And as I've continued to study and ruminate on these things, far more in keeping with the Hebraic tradition that God is, the easiest way for me to split it was to take a, at least for Christians, was to take a passage out of the book of Isaiah where Isaiah goes into the temple and there's these angels there and they cry out, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty. The whole earth is full of his glory. So holy, holy, holy in Hebrew is this idea that God is different, set apart. He's distinct from the world. The whole earth is full of his glory means that God is everywhere present. His fingerprints are all over the world. So pantheism would be an idea of God and the world are essentially a closed set. So that would be an imminent God. A transcendent God is separate from the world. Now part of, there was a Hebrew scholar in the 1930s who wrote a very interesting book comparing the Hebrew conception of God in the Bible as opposed to surrounding conceptions and mythologies of the other ancient Near East cultures. And he came up with the idea that most cultures have what he called a meta divine realm in which there's basically an impersonal arena in which various gods are agents within that arena as our human beings, as might be sun, moon and stars. All of these are agents within the human realm. Sam Harris's God number two is sort of an agent within the arena. Jordan Peterson's God number one is sort of the arena itself that can have an agentic power sometimes. So when I thought about what happened in terms of Christian history, especially when we get to deism, the development of the deism, the development of the deism of the human race, the development of the human race, and then we get to deism, the development of deism, whereas before if there's a tsunami or an earthquake, well, that was God doing that. And it was God's judgment on the people. Well, once you have this idea of deism which arrives at this idea of nature, nature as this independent thing from God, well, now when there's a tsunami, well, it's nobody's fault. And nature is this thing that runs on its own. And then you had, at least in Christian circles, the idea of a clockmaker God who kind of winds up the universe and lets it go, and things happen on their own. And I think over time what very much happened was God increasingly became a figure in the system, but the universe itself was impersonal. And so that was sort of a loss of this original Hebrew conception, which was everything sort of in one package. All right? And so that's where you get this distinction, God number one and God number two. That's summarizing hours and hours and hours of talk. Maybe it'll give you a little taste of it. I'll try to approach it a little bit from a seek angle, if you don't mind. There's a passage that's part of the daily liturgy which goes, you have a thousand eyes, yet without eye are you. You have a thousand faces, yet without face are you. You have a thousand feet, yet without foot are you. You have a thousand scents, yet without scent are you. I am enchanted by your wonders. There is a light in all, and that light is you. By that light we are illuminated. And there's this distinct, like, I think maybe a elementary way to think about God number two is this phrase of Mr. God. That might be a little reductionist, but like, it seems that Mr. God is the person who's going to help you, right? It's God kind of like as a superhero. I think, like, I think that's a really interesting point. I think that, like, in Sikki, just like in Christianity, God number one and God number two are the same thing. God does, like, sort of manifest in this personal way as Mr. God. And I think that's a consequence of things that happened a long time ago, like you're laying out, Paul, that people have sort of developed this idolatrous relationship with God number two at the expense of God number one. And for the left, especially the woke left, God number two is being manifested as the state. And for the prosperity gospel sort of Christian fundamentalist evangelical branch, I don't know exactly how you would label it, but that idolatrous God number two relationship on the right side of the political spectrum kind of makes an idol out of Jesus. I don't want to say that in a, and I hope that doesn't make too many of your listeners upset, but it's this idea that Jesus is going to make sure you get, like, a good, a nice car or Jesus is going to help you out financially. And it's a very, it's an ends based relationship. You're not in the relationship with Jesus necessarily for the sake of being in the relationship. You're going to get some good out of it. And I think that if you do not have, if you're not oriented with God number one properly, God number two cannot save you. God number two saves people in a personal way. God number two does not save the world. That's the responsibility of the believers to stay in alignment with God number one. And so in Sikhism, there's a couple of things where like God does manifest as a person. There's a quick line. So I actually, I'm no expert in Sikhism. I'm just someone trying to learn about it and live it properly. But I actually found a new section of the holy book, the Guru Granth Sahib, that I was ignorant of. And it's a section where some disciples are praising the gurus. And they say, Kapila and the other yogi Singh of Guru Nanak, he is the avatar, the incarnation of the infinite Lord. So it is this notion of God taking flesh into the world. But Guru Nanak goes around and he saves individual people and then he keeps reincarnating 10 different times. But the really kind of interesting thing is that by the 10th incarnation Guru Gobind Singh, he says something along the lines of those who call me God will fall into the pit of hell. Regard me as a humble servant of the Lord and have no doubt about it. So here is God manifesting as a person and he tells people, do not think I am God, even though in other places it says I am God. And it's contradictory, but it's this sort of warning to not make an idol out of the flesh version of God because God is reality itself. Like how vervecchi would talk about it. Like reality and God are the same thing, at least as far as I can make sense of it. Well, that would be, you know, part of what's difficult in these conversations is so a question would be, is God exhausted by the thing we call reality? And in Christianity, God would not be exhausted by the thing we call reality because God is in fact the source of that thing we call reality. And in a contemporary way, it's been interesting to watch the simulation theories arise and people's interest in those because, again, now suddenly when you have the picture of a programmer coding a program in which we are all programs within that program, now suddenly you get a conception of God and some of those relationships with that God can sort of manifest in there. And so one of the things that we struggle with is, so the holy, holy, holy idea in Christianity is that God is, in Judaism, is that God is beyond our conception. This is not something we are able to conceive of. Yet then how can God relate to us? And so Christianity, obviously with Jesus Christ, God writes himself into the story in the incarnation. So I have a question for you guys, if you don't mind me cutting in. Who do you think or what do you think the, whether you call it woke ideology or identity people, anti-racist, maybe what do you think they conceive of as God? What is there gone to them? And it kind of reminded me when you said not able to conceive of kind of this idea that people of different races or genders or sexualities have separate experiences. And so this, there's been a meme we talked about before in our last episode, or maybe the first one about I will never understand, but I'll stand with you. And that it kind of reminds me of this idea in religion where you can't actually understand or conceive of God or his will or knowledge. You sort of have to take it upon faith. But then I don't really see, I don't know if I, if I could answer that question, like what they would see as God or if they have a God that they look up to. A lot depends on how you're using that. See, God is this astoundingly useful idea and word that is just all over the place. One of the things that's incredibly important to remember about woke ideology is that it's a deeply secular movement. And what that means is, whereas, let's say in the 19th century, and in many different Christian traditions, people would be anticipating a life in a world to come, an afterlife. And, and so then eternal judgment, you know, happens in the afterlife, eternal reward happens in the afterlife. The best that I can understand is evil in the better question might be what is evil in woke religion and evil is an experience of oppression, or I would think actually more of a failure to realize a desire. And when I say realize a desire, I mean, a failure to fully to fully live into a desire. Okay, so it's, it's, it's, and because it's a secularized thing that desire at least for you as an individual someone whose identity is based on your oppression that, you know, that that must happen within your life. Now I think there's another aspect of it, which you can find, let's say in John Lennon song where this desire must somehow happen in human behavior or a human future. And so ideas such as, you know, an asteroid hitting the world or nuclear annihilation I mean all of those are threats as well, but, but it's a very, the epistemology of woke ism. It's sort of, you sort of have sort of a Cartesian epistemology where I am oppressed therefore I am and salvation is released from that oppression. And now, full salvation would be the release everyone's release from their oppression. The difficulty of course is that once you start working in these terms, there's going to be an oppressor. Well, what does the oppressor need well the oppressor is oppressed as well okay, but maybe the desire of that oppressor is to oppress, maybe that's their fulfillment. What do you do with that? No. And so then very quickly you're going to have a, now you're going to have something more objective come in and say no. And so all of these rules are going to then line up that this is oppression and this is not an oppression. Whiteness is bad, blackness is good. And what happens is people begin at this little kernel and you're very quickly going to manifest a legal framework and objective rate because you a system simply can't do without it. If it's got multiple people so. It seems also. I think like there, it's obviously a secular movement but there's been discussion, people like john mcwarder talked about it. I saw Coleman Hughes mentioned it recently I've seen Ross doubt. How do you say his name doubt doubt that talk about this recently that it's taken on And so it's not like typical you know they're not going to church and praying necessarily but the way that their reasoning is reminiscent of religion and sort of like a passionate almost like a Fire and brimstone sort of preaching and I think it's interesting you bring up like evil because it does seem that they're focused more on defeating evil than praising good. And that that does seem to lead to quite a few problems and it's hard to it seems like it's hard to create a move sustain a movement or create anything worthwhile if you're so focused on negation. And Roger and I brought you might want to chime in here we were we've talked about this idea of Nietzsche and decadence and resentment and it seems that that plays a role in this desire to negate that people are resenting good rather than they're inverting values in a certain sort of sense. There's on what's his name Herman Kane we in our first episode we talked to And he mentioned this quote by Herman Kane where he's basically saying that for some reason this woke left. They aren't going towards the future. I think this is related towards the negation rather than trying to create something positive and I don't mean positive as in good but positive as in Creating something rather than getting rid of something. And Herman Kane says that there's this focus on fixing the past rather than building a better future. And I think both of these. This, this question of being hyper focused on evil. It's It's a related sort of phenomenon where you got to fix things but the fixing is about changing interpretations or changing the understanding of other people in the past, rather than An individual or the group of people being better and going into the future together. I think that's very true. I think it's one of its huge weaknesses is it's fundamentally a reactive movement in that if you no longer had the enemy. Right. What are you going to do now. So this is This is something that Ethan and I noticed while we were at Bart's a bard sort of touts itself for being one of the first colleges to offer a degree in human rights. It sounds really good really well intention and all that right there's probably some worthwhile effort and studying what human rights are but what we were noticing, especially in the way that administrators worked on campus was it seems to It seems to If all of a sudden you have a degree for human rights and your job is going to be fixing human rights abuses, you're going to be looking for human rights violations everywhere and your job might actually rely on the fact that you might need to manufacture some human rights problems. label regular hold problems as a human rights issue. So you're kind of raising the level of conversation you're like you're always in DEF CON RET. And so it can't just be that you know there's some unthoughtful students on campus who aren't being kind to their other students there's human rights violations going on, and even I don't think human rights thing might not be necessary but just some sort of, you know, if you're in gender and Sexualities class where you're constantly learning about how institutions are sexist and it's bad to read too many old white men and all your professors are white men, you're going to start to think, oh my god, I'm in a sexist system. I got to do something about this. Right in that. Yeah. Sorry. I agree. And it's, it's remarkably difficult. So CS Lewis was a was a was a teacher was a professor of medieval English at Mandolin College in in the UK in the middle of the 20th century. He wrote these Narnia Chronicles and and commenters have noted that it's it's relatively easy to write an engaging fictional Negative hero or villain villains are fairly easy to represent their fun to play for actors. It's really difficult to to write compelling good people. Goodness is remarkably GK Chester to made a similar observation. Most of most of the moral insights we are able to generate are responsive to what we see as evil, evil is fairly easy to identify Something that is good in and of itself is much, much more difficult. And, and this, this gets into, you know, the, the, the Orwellian response to, you know, Stalin, which is in order to make an omelet, you have to break some eggs and George Orwell's response was where's the omelet. And, and that's a, you know, that's a, that's a vigorous, you know, Douglas Murray, I'll give credit to him for remembering this. That's a that's a really, you know, and I've seen this for years. So, so I grew up in what was in the 60s and 70s, a racial reconciliation church that my father was pastoring where The idea was can can white folks and black folks worship together. And so most of the people in the church I grew up in were black. It was in a poor community. And this was the project. It was a project I would call second wave anti racism where the focus was on integration, living together, you know, a communal life across racial and cultural lines. And that's the setting in which I grew up and it was a it was a wonderful time and place in many ways to grow up. And then I watched the I watched the social justice conversation continue. And at some point I began asking people show me a fully developed community because you had poor communities in which it was fairly obvious that well The, the, the, the manifestations of poverty and violations of human rights were fairly easy to see. Okay, now let's go off into a suburban community that is full of resources and all of those things. Well, right away you begin pointing fingers. Well, these people are, you know, parasitic of the deficiencies here. So it's like, well, show me, show me the kind of community you want people to live in. Yeah, we just did our last episode on chess chop. And yeah, the type of community that they want to live in does not work out very well. And yeah, it's kind of it seems like, like, I think the modern day, you call them social justice warriors book ideology. And then they want to live in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a . Especially minorities and so like they really want to live near black people but it seems more because because they want to be seen as anti-racist and they're not moving to Harlem or to the Bronx as much as they're moving to Williamsburg so I don't know I think there's something to be said there. This is an old thing I remember when I was in college that was during the Sandinista the Sandinista thing and I was going down to Nicaragua to tour the revolution. I remember one woman coming down with us she was a student she's like we're going to see the poor and I thought don't have to go to Nicaragua to see the poor. I grew up there's poor people all over the place I mean and and and and they have this it's a fetishization it's a romanticism and and so so now you've got this so I grew up again in the 60s and 70s and I watched you know the white flight people leaving the cities because of riots and protests and then in the 90s with friends and Seinfeld and Sex and the City they all came back to the city and oh now gentrification well just wait it's gonna be oh now white flight I mean you it's sort of there's a there's a there's a strange combination of self-righteousness and deep moral insecurity you know as someone like you know Shelby Steele calls white guilt and and these things come together whereas if you look at the history of religious communities and this is I mean this is deep in American history there are there have been many communities that have had deeply concerted efforts to try to realize one way or another the omelet in our midst and and and this has this has been basically the project of religious communities for a very long time especially since in Christianity since the Protestant Reformation and in many ways I see these current movements as heirs of New England transcendentalism if you look at the if you look at the the history of the American Northeast the pilgrims the Puritans it's it's it's all a continuation of the same story we where we went to college Bard it's actually probably on the southernmost tip of the the burnt over area and it's like this new version of this same utopian project is showing up again yeah it reminds me of well one thing I had I had the very similar thing that I I was talking to a girl in a bar and we were talking about where we would travel if we could I mentioned that I wanted to go to India maybe with Rajdeep to visit our friend Amar who was living there until recently and I said like oh he's got like a fairly nice place and we have another friend who's like fairly wealthy and she said well don't you want to see real India like the poverty I was like well not particularly on my vacation you know like if I'm gonna go do volunteer work you know to help someone or if I really want to see poverty I could go to Baltimore Detroit or Orlando Miami Los Angeles the Bronx so I just thought that was really funny but um with this kind of white flight and rebound thing I there's a song love me I'm a liberal by Phil Oakes and it's funny how it's exactly relevant today or he says like you know I want a colored people to be free and wealthy I just don't want them to live next door something of that effect and it's it's you know I think it's you could change the lyrics ever so slightly and it would very accurately depict what's going on now what is it 60 years later since he wrote that yeah yeah these things it's not new there there are new aspects and manifestations and it's obviously new to a lot of people it's more sophisticated I think too like the the rhetoric in the language has required has acquired a very academic nature to it so like white privilege institutionalized racism heteronormativity these words of kinds kind of become more developed and powerful even though the impulse was always there I think yeah and it's you know I had a conversation with a the guy who was a what do you call a gender anarchist you know and it's it's you just start following some of these things down and you can deconstruct forever the part of again I think a key to this is that you will you will land finally on well if if I am my oppression and and what I seek is liberation when will that liberation just simply be realized to be the manifestation of my own desire well that's not terribly easy to always know either just just really pin someone down and say what do you want and suddenly this gets into some of the verveky stuff now that now suddenly you're gonna have a meaning crisis because what am I simply a manifestations of my biological my biological desires or the constructed desires of of of my history and the history that you know tracks down and pretty soon I am nothing I am just a desire and if you're getting to your own deep questions of identity if your purpose is to be anti-racist that is just a negation you don't actually you can't go very far with that and I saw this with when I went to college I you know into a large public high school wasn't the best school in the world so we didn't you know get exposed to very much philosophy or like deeper stuff so I started learning more about this and I initially thought wow a lot of these students are so smart brilliant they went to all these private schools and then when you start to investigate deeper it seems almost very shallow and they don't actually have very many firm beliefs one thing I actually wrote down in my notes I don't know maybe Raj don't want to move on or want to keep talking but I remember when I was a kid and growing up we weren't very religious we went to church when I was younger my mother grew up Catholic but um my parents talked about the idea of a conscience very much and when I got to college I don't think I ever heard that word used despite all this talk about morality good bad I was thinking about why I don't think I've ever heard anyone use that word and it's more just about like sort of what do we know what are you who do you believe what do you believe in what is are you just a mass of cells whose goal is to be anti-racist well what do you do and I guess anti-racism is never over if you believe certain people but I don't know it just seems to inevitably lead to a crisis of meaning if your goal is to be anti something I think that's also like America is facing a lot of political problems right now but I think the deeper issue is this meaning crisis and people are there's this vacuum for this religious spiritual fulfillment and people are turning to politics for that fulfillment in the chas chop situation there was a woman who gave a speech and she said so when you come into this space understand that you are now walking in holy land this is spiritual and it's like oh whoa and this is also a woman who is says later on there's a you can find the article on some Seattle Times but she also talks about how it's a place where white people need to get educated and she doesn't feel comfortable there in her black body and it's like whoa these are the incongruency between this being a holy spiritual space and you sing like it's this really profane space that's full of sin it's like it's the contradictions inside of this ideology are just it's manifold and it's really concerning because it's not healthy for people we saw lots of people at school and it seemed like their mental health deteriorated over the course of their time at college and it's sharply yeah and it's it's really concerning not just for what it's bringing about politically but the damage it's doing to people's individual lives and it's setting family members against each other people can't listen huh I'm gonna say personally since leaving college I've noticed being happier and less stressed just by not being in this sort of environment immediately like night and day over a course of a couple months right and now it's like I'm mostly around a political people and it's life's never really been better yeah when you go to like I'm not gonna say I haven't had political discussions at bars and whatnot a lot of people don't want to talk about politics but now recently that sort of shifted but the last couple years I've mostly me and my friends just kind of bullshit nonsense a lot of times make fun of each other and I'm I like talking about politics but it does sort of make it life has been a lot more fun since I wasn't around a lot of these woke people or social justice warriors um this hunger too I think that the spiritual hunger I think it's a hunger for God one and people aren't understanding that like this New Age stuff that we see that's all people wanting to get in touch with God on this idea of oneness even the atheists who are turning to Buddhism they're trying to find God one through negation of everything um and it's I I think that's something that needs to desperately be recovered and I think that's like that's kind of the guru's mission and Sikhism he just kind of comes around and keeps whacking people on the head saying don't forget God one don't forget God one and um like you see this even in the story of Sodom and Gomorrah right God is saying when Abraham is trying to make the deal with God trying to save Sodom and he's negotiating how many people need to be able to if there are 50 righteous people in the city will you save it or whatever and he kind of keeps negotiating the price down all the way down to I think 10 people or something like that and it's like if you have 10 people who understand God one and are living in congruence with God one then God too can come save but if God too but if only one person understands God one God too will come save that person and his family but the rest of the city will burn to the ground and I think that's kind of what communists and the Soviet Union and in Nazi Germany obviously there's extenuating material factors into how things actually play out in each situation but I think that that's this sort of simplistic religious answer to the question because I got interested kind of in post-holocaust theology for a long time and it's like how do how could God let this happen how could God let this happen and Elie Wiesel I think he has this play about putting God on trial not necessarily for the Holocaust but for something that happened I think in the late 1600s and I believe the play ends with the jury finding God guilty and then they all pray like that that's the end of the story God is guilty of the crime the the way that you can judge God in a criminal court that version of God is found guilty but the solution to the problem is everyone starts praying it's interesting I've read some we sell but I haven't read out I haven't read all of him um I think um there's you might if we talked about Kanye for a second Raj I wanted to ask you one quick question yeah well if you want to chime in but I definitely wanted to talk about Kanye in a minute um just to go back to this God as a solution or problem the way my opinion would be that community in terms of having friends family a place in the community maybe you you see your friend every day and you wave to him or maybe you always go to the same deli and you see the same guy you know that sort of local being in harmony with your other fellow people I think to me that's the solution rather than God this personally that's true see people who are I guess you could say church but or the song and Sikhism like it's being in the presence of people who are sort of working on this project of going into a positive direction that that's what the the sath sangat is the true congregation company of the holy and the guru says when he um the last guru he says that um the I am the body which is the word it's the um it's the scripture but I have also the call so which is the body of initiated seeks the the um baptized body he says I am now like this is my form as a body my form is also a scripture but my form is also the community like when God to manifest itself it manifests on these three levels of a sort of text a person and the community through which you're trying to realize the vision of what it means to live in accordance with God one um I don't know if uh Paul probably knows a lot more about community being a pastor and all that yeah communities hard and and the you know it's always the truth is where we're all participating in in various communities at the same time we have a little community of three right now um if you have if you have a marriage or significant other you have a community of two if you have biological children in my case I have five community of seven um have a local congregation that's a community of 5075 um the Christian Reformed community that's a community of about a quarter million but but right away you begin to say well the the community of within a marriage the community within a family these are all they all have different levels and they also have different orientations you might have a group of friends that you play world of warcraft together and and there's a community and so then very quickly what you become is this this this hub in a network of communities and you're exactly right that for human beings I mean we're deeply communal creatures we are made for each other and a lot of happiness studies come out with the most obvious answer which is that people are most happy when they are in community but that you know is what is that community around I I I heard once that the German people were never happiest as as they were under at least before the war started taking its toll in Nazi Germany but they suddenly as a community they were around an ideal and it's very interesting and I think this is part of the reason that right now woke ism is so strong because whoosh here is a here is a moral center for our community and what is better than to be against oppression or racism or injustice and you know you can very quickly develop a community that way a mob is a community of sorts and part of the reason people do what they would never do individually is they manifest in a sense the principality or the spirit of that community so it's it's vital but tricky I think in a certain way though to become a mob when you become a mob you sort of abandon all of your other communities and so you shut off your other ties to your fellow people and you then completely become absorbed in that maybe communities to amorphous of a term I think but I think like what I guess I mean more specifically is kind of like positive social bonds between people so you might have these a community in Germany during early Nazi era where they're happy but I think there might be something they feel happy but they don't actually have true social connections so much as there's been an enforced ideology that for it makes them behave in a homogenous way which reduces complex but that's also very much what the woke ideology is kind of pushing which is enforced conformity in order to lessen negative feelings yeah maybe it has chopped people right during the day at the beginning of their experiment they loved it they thought it was the greatest thing and it had this feeling of being like an art fair it had this feeling of like there's these hippie vibes going on and it seemed like a really great place at the beginning but it very quickly crashed and burned but I think that's sort of like this idea of what are you looking up to or what's in the center that's the thing that you have to circumambulate and if you have this principality that is not the most high it's gonna fall apart like the positive social bonds happen because you're actually oriented toward the right thing something like truth or something like love if you want to use virtue terms and if the if the community looks up and what they see is if they look up the hierarchy and what they see is oppression or what they look to in the center and what they see is oppression and excluding you're not going to be able to go up and down and you're not going to be able to go round and round what if they look up to Kanye West well Kanye is not some people might say that Kanye is looking to himself as the most high but I don't think that is the case I know that you and Peugeot talked a little herb you made some videos about Peugeot's take on Kanye Paul and I was just curious if you've listened to the song washes in the blood that is his most recent release no I haven't heard that one yet okay so I'm pretty close to the beginning this thought goes into your conversation about mooks and nights lyrics are is there anybody here is there anybody here that can save no matter how much you play or hate it was the blood that cleansed me and so Kanye is aware of these things I don't know how much in a rational sense he's aware of these things going on but he's definitely intuitively aware of these dynamics and he's trying to he's doing something different I don't know if you guys saw any of the footage from his recent rally it's gotten a lot of heat especially from people on the left and they can't understand what he's doing especially when he starts talking about religion they just think he's talking nonsense like when he kind of makes this parallel between him and Moses they're like the ego on this guy but it's like Dr. King did something similar and they you know they kind of they think of his so he cries he kind of cries and he has this outburst of emotion and people take it as this manifestation of his mental illness but he's crying over the fact that he was almost aborted and he had asked him to abort their daughter and it's like I totally understand why you would cry about that and one of the like he's doing these things that are very unpolitician like and we've all been complaining about how politicians have been operating recently and one of them is like they're divorced from reality and it's like here's a very real problem that lots of people face in our country right this question of how to interact with abortion and he gives his sort of he recounts his experience and then he is personally he doesn't think abortion is something that you should do but he also goes on to say in the same conversation or same rally that he doesn't think it should be outlawed he actually calls up a woman from the crowd to come onto the stage or come to the front and she gives her a viewpoint on why she thinks that abortion should stay legal and he gives he gives up the he gives the space to someone in that crowd to speak to him I don't think Donald Trump or Joe Biden would do it do that or nor would they do it in they wouldn't do it in the organic way this didn't seem like some sort of plant right if Trump or Biden were to do that it would be much more planned out and he gives her space to talk and he says he says something along the lines of abortion should not be legalized but this is something this is the thing that really piqued my interest so we should give everybody who we should give people who have a baby fifty thousand dollars maybe a million dollars right and it sounds crazy but he's um he is trying to I think one of the biggest problems our country has is that we incentivize single-parent households and he's trying to look for a solution to that problem and I don't know how you solve that problem how do you start incentivizing two-parent households but that seems to be and this is something that lots of black Republicans picked up on I recently watched Larry elders documentary Uncle Tom and what so many black Republicans are talking about is is that our communities are failing because 75% of our kids are growing up in single-parent homes that's that's tragedy that's not a good thing I like single moms I know that they've got their work out cut out from a lot of them try really hard I also know some of them don't like big it's if you've got to work a job maybe two jobs and you're trying to raise children I don't know how you can do that and I don't have kids but it seems that seems almost like an impossible task oh and one so okay so we can say what's what's with what's with that how should children be raised well you have what first of all normally biologically you're not going to have a child by yourself you know I can't just decide I'm gonna have a baby no I need oh I'm gonna have to partner with a woman to do this can you and I think this gets into Kanye can you sustain a relationship can you sustain a healthy little community that's remarkably difficult and it very quickly gets into the question of these desires because you know it's not if you're a if you're a person with a sex drive it's not and if you're a person with a heterosexual sex drive and you're young odds are if everything's working a child very much very well may come out of this okay what do children need children need stability they need reliability are you going to be there for me and be there for me and just about every spectrum be there for me financially be there for me emotionally and and then you know from one to six it's corn at zero to six it's Lord be there for me giving me everything I need six on up it's more be there for me but giving the right kind of support and also push back and train and say no I mean it's an enormously complex thing Kanye is sort of this if you had if you had an amplifier and a speaker and you could plug it into your something as a creature of sort of pure intuition right listening to Kanye is like the raw feed of intuition he's over here he's over there he's over here is over there you know he was running for president and he hired a guy to and that guy of course was diligently trying to on to ballots and then Kanye doesn't now we're not gonna I'm gonna run for president but we're not gonna worry about any of that balloting voting thing okay um so run for president and and this this then gets into the question in American context and Trump of course was sort of a liminal figure in this because was Trump really serious about running for president was it a lark I mean it was he an accidental winner and and now even that he's as president you know he'll he says these crazy things about you know I'm gonna order I'm gonna order all the churches open and people are like well there's this little thing called the law this isn't a power you possess but in Trump's mind he does but does he or doesn't he and so Kanye is sort of like an extreme version of Trump in some ways slaying aside the whole political questions but Kanye is in many ways if there are many many people out there like Kanye I meet them every day who have all kinds of ideas about everything why don't we listen to them well Kanye also has I mean nobody just gave Kanye didn't inherit all of this wealth he developed he's a very talented musician and music is a form in which his intuition plays well and and in some ways I think part of the reason Kanye has the attention is because he has lived he has lived at least for some communities the black American dream you know if you go to my channel you can find the Freddie and Paul show on my channel that's actually where I started on YouTube Freddie is a member of my church and Freddie is a rapper Freddie's white he's but he's a he was baptized in this church a son of two white parents who don't rap at all but where Freddie went the high school so on and so forth so if you listen to Freddie and you listen to Kanye well there's some connection between the two of them Kanye was a success went all the way to the top and realized what for a while he he had a relationship with a porn star for a while wasn't that thing I mean it was like the life of a rapper but he didn't grow up in the hood his mother was an academic and so he's in some ways managed to bridge both the black ghetto thugs life and the university academic life and now he's sort of going into the political sphere and of course he married the queen of famous for being famous and now wealthy for being famous I mean in many ways Kanye and Kim manifest these aspirational archetypes in our culture and so president is just in some ways the natural step just like it was Donald Trump but this I think in some ways is is also pushing on so when if you talk to Jonathan Peugeot he says well I'm a monarchist because in some ways monarchy sort of in Peugeotian language lays itself out naturally what the United States did was say no more King okay we're going to have in a sense a paper king called the Constitution and the process is going to be nailed down and so Kings are unpredictable so we're going to have a process and so we're gonna have a president and a Congress and a judiciary and this is the system the system is going to be the agent instead of a human agent who is a king and in some ways what's happening in American culture and has been happening for a long time Obama was a king he had a royal family JFK they called it Camelot that wasn't an accident Donald Trump has acted like a king Kanye I mean so this this archetype is manifesting itself before our eyes but it's a very chaotic one and as Peugeot said it's sort of the the fool or the clown and he's turning it around Eric Weinstein I don't remember what thing I was watching he kind of makes this throwaway comment and might have been on one of his Rogan interviews this idea of having a fourth branch of the United States government which is the symbolic and he's like that that would be they don't have any real power but it's someone that people can vote for as the representative of the United States and it's like Kim and Kanye if we had a symbolic branch they would be I don't know who would be more appropriate for that position pay attention when you say they don't have any power right they have this influence over the question is what kind of power is that I mean earlier in the conversation you know you have people and as a pastor often when people use that word spiritual I stop them and say tell me what that means because people are like well they don't know what it means but they do know what it means and so it sort of sloshes around the meaning of it with the word and okay well the Queen of England does she have power just tremendous power what kind of power the ability to act and have others act with you that's the RNT in definition of power I think it's an on revolution power is the ability to act and have others act with you so like institutional power is not like if you know what I mean saying institutional power is not really that informative if you don't understand what power is you understand power as acting or there's acts with you then it very clearly becomes like Queen Elizabeth is powerful Kim Kardashian is powerful somebody with 10,000 Twitter followers is a little powerful exactly and so a symbolic I mean what what does the Queen of England do so when there's Kovac she steps out and makes a statement and everyone's like oh well she she fulfilled her role I mean I watched Netflix the Crown and I mean haunting that is what power do we really have and you know I hear people talking about the glass ceiling it's like did Queen Victoria have power Queen Victoria had tremendous power Queen Elizabeth had tremendous power Cleopatra had tremendous power Catherine the Great Maria Theresa yeah well I wanted to um I wanted to go back a little to this Kanye West thing so I actually I worked in a flower shop for a while when I first moved to New York City and it's very high-end flower shop off Fifth Avenue it's out of business now it folded but we had a bunch we had some fairly high high-level clients and I'm not gonna name any names specifically but actors people you definitely recognize here of and several people I knew were heavily involved in the event planning wedding industry so I got a little bit of insight peel behind the curtain of how these crazy powerful wealthy celebrities or actresses musicians etc and a lot of what people believe about them is completely fabricated for the public to consume so and it's impossible I think for average person to really know so when Kanye West goes out and does this thing that appears to be entirely spur of the moment I think it's actually more likely it's very carefully planned and especially people like the Kardashians and Kanye West they spent years cultivating a very careful image that they feed to people this might be a little bit cynical but I think that they precisely they plan this and Kanye West outbursts and his erraticism it may be a mental illness which is I think more worrying than the lying facade but I think a lot of it is this line sort of facade and he I think he acts and exit eccentricly so he said excentrically and in order to kind of come across this a little bit more down to earth like people are more willing to look I know you're not actually that powerful and together but then also this idea of like Raj you mentioned that he was willing to let this woman come on stage ostensibly just spur of the moment and Biden or Trump wouldn't do that if you go back to like Paul I think you're you talked you were reading about the founding fathers recently the founding fathers are terrified of a popular leader who would talk directly to the people of the demagogue there when they said popular leader that's equivalent of a demagogue and that was seen as like a huge danger to our Republic and our project as this sort of federalist system that one person could unify people through speaking directly to them I think that this to be a little bit more cynical let you talk one second Raj but to be a little bit more cynical I think that it's not disconnected that Kanye and Kim got some sort of access in the Trump White House and they're now running in a way that might enable Trump's victory in a small sense I see the danger you're talking about and Kanye doing that little thing with this woman coming up on stage I'm not I didn't say it was a good thing but it is something that the populist left and right want and now that someone did it they're saying look how crazy he is so there's something about I've seen particularly one fella he has a show called secular talk Kyle Kalinsky he's very much this pro populist left stance and now someone did something where he's he's someone who wants to get rid of the electoral college and have just direct democracy right like the most extreme version of just one vote one one person one vote that's how things should be run and I don't agree with that but this is like Kanye is manifesting this populism that people are crying out for and then he does it and people are saying he's crazy and it's a very odd thing it's like you recognize that you wanted this but yeah I take your the warning about the sort of populism I agree with you I mean the founders were worried about it well the the so what is the contrast of populism elitism and these things usually when why is populism so so you know on the rise now because there's a sense in which the elites have not fulfilled their end of the bargain the bargain of the elite is you have power you have you have privilege you have all of these things but you do this in terms of being of serving the masses and the idea now is that the elites have they've made all the money you know a lot of the wealth has been generated for them and many many people have not and so now it's time to tear down the elites but just like with with Chas or Chop these systems will you will create a new system you can't help it because you rely on these systems and you know it's it's usually only in I often tell people good administration is invisible you know a good administration means I don't have to think about it and a country that is working fairly well as a country where we don't have to worry about politics because politicians are taking care the lights are on there are no invading armies the systems are working someone is keeping the systems going so that I have the liberty to play computer games or watch Netflix or maybe I'll have to go to work and contribute to the system in some way but I do have a degree of freedom from the system in order to manifest what I want in terms of what we call my private space I mean all of this stuff is all of this stuff is produced by our civilization and I this is why I I look at a lot of the woke people and I I don't take them terribly seriously in the sense that I've seen religious people sacrifice and commit themselves in an enduring way in order to achieve a particular goal that might be a community they poured money and time into that community I think a lot of people are just sort of playing at this if I go out into the street and I put up my fist and I make a sign and I yell magic words then racism goes away or doesn't go away but I'll I mean and I look at this and I think my the generation of my parents moved into Patterson New Jersey and we built community across racial lines and raised their children there and committed their money there they gave their life to this vision that's what religions people do in a serious way and what I see now are consumers that are sort of playing they have little electronic avatars which they imagine themselves to be it's it's animal crossing you know that's the kind of religion they're playing at and you can see that because of the decline of religious communities well there's a around the corner it's not I don't know if it's how much it's still going on but very close to me there's a park called McCarran Park in Brooklyn and that's where they had these these big vigils for George Floyd constantly I don't know what the frequency was but it was at least every night for the first couple weeks and then it was on Saturdays etc and there's a couple main ways that most people get to it so you'd see people going with signs and going to meet up etc and along one of the main thoroughfares me and my friends were just walking around the neighborhood and we're going from the to this one bar as we pass this one lady all the time who would be kneeling down white lady kneeling down with her fist in the air holding a sign saying something about white silences violence anti-racism and I looked at her and like that she's no different than the guy with the crazy hair standing on the subway platform saying the end is nigh and anything that guy I'd rather talk to that guy because at least he's gonna tell me something I've heard before maybe but like she's looking for some kind like you know if she stays out there too long she is gonna end up you know having that sign but um I don't know it just struck me as like a hilarious moment where this you know clearly it seems like college educated upper middle-class woman has turned into the street preacher I almost wanted to take like a pot and put an extra on the street um this this populism issue and the the sort of gulf that's developing between the people on one hand and the elites on the other hand and it seems that people feel powerless people feel powerless in their individual lives and I think that's a big problem because if you're feeling powerless then maybe you are powerless and that means that it's like we have a in we have income any inequality in the country but we also have this power inequality and I just want to read something real quick from the origins of totalitarianism this book has been written against a background of both reckless optimism and reckless despair it holds that progress and doom are two sides of the same metal that both are articles of superstition not of faith and this I think it speaks to the powerlessness that post World War one Germans were feeling the powerlessness that the the serfs were feeling in Russia and I think that the the religious project in a lot of ways we talked about Peterson bringing agency into people's lives and the sort of religious project of what what Christ was doing and what nonic was doing what the gurus were doing these are two traditions I feel most comfortable talking about because you can correct me on the Christian stuff Paul but they kind of do the same thing they give agency back to the people or they they awaken agency within people and like Guru Gobind Singh's goal in one sense was to put a king in every saddle and like one of the way like it seems that one of the ways to kind of solve this problem of elitism is to actually become an elite a little bit in your own life like we talk of what is it bowling alone people are bowling in leagues less and less but people are bowling more people are no longer presidents of things like the Lions Club right people aren't in these local positions of power of these local authority and so even even the degradation of the household is the same thing right tons of people are feel powerless over their children it's like what are you talking about the kids four years old you're in charge but I know plenty of parents where the kid is in charge and it's like you're powerless over a you can't get a five-year-old to act in accordance with you and it's like it's I don't know people need to wake up and recognize the power that they have within themselves and before Kanye sort of did this release Jesus and his king and started doing this more active Christian thing he had a album called Jesus and on that album he has a song called I am a God and people they don't take too kindly to that and it might betray a certain narcissism or arrogance but he also says that he's a servant of the most high in that song he says that he's talking with Jesus and so it's like he's not saying that he is God one or even God two but he is a God right he's a he's a principality and it's like people need to recognize like their own principality like nature in a sense you are most likely gonna be a sir like you are gonna be a servant but it's like which king are you going to serve the king who actually or it's like a manager right like a good manager delegates tasks and lets people leaves them to their own devices to fix the problems and then only if there's something that can't be solved as the manager step in and kind of do things the manager isn't trying to be like he's not micromanaging everyone and wanting to actually do everything himself which is seems like how people feel about institutions right now institutions are crumbling as people look at them as being these things that are supposed to fix and change everything we've have less less faith in our institutions than ever before but we keep asking them to do more and more things it doesn't make any sense to me okay with the the aren't quote one of her big themes and one of the origins so to speak of totalitarianism is ruthlessness and especially with the the 19th century and the Industrial Revolution people are suddenly swept away from where they lived for generations and put into cities and that removes the common bonds and creates an atomized society and it goes back to this ball-and-a-loan idea and various people have picked up on the like death of social life whatever you want to call it in America but she hits on this ruthlessness thing over and over and over again and in some way forming roots seems to be an antidote to totalitarianism and I think a lot of these people on the woke left they don't have roots very much or if they have them they're ashamed of them because they might be white or their parents might be conservatives etc who knows I think maybe I don't know I'm not religious at all I'm an atheist but I do see how church can be that sort of root that forms the community grows around so like the it's one of those roots that maybe at school is churches your Kiwanis Club your sports league and they all provide sort of the roots that allows the community tree to flourish well and you know we in my channel I talked for a man about principalities and what what happens when you know so one of my illustrations of what I mean by spirit think about school spirit what what is because I use school spirit because most people have some experience of that maybe your high school or your college usually a high school because at that point the students have reached a developmental level that they can actually participate in school spirit and and so you you ask yourself well where does school spirit come from well obviously the principal has something to do with it the the architecture of the building has something to do with it where the building sits in the city or the country has something to do with it the leaders within the student body have something to do with it in fact past leaders of classes that schools are interesting because usually you have a about a four-year cycle let's say a high school nine through twelve and so you know five years the at least among the students the memory is mostly obliterated you might have had brothers or sisters in it and you think about what goes into school spirit and you think about the fact that school spirit can be a positive or a negative thing and in fact but it is something that can their whole life and okay so what is it and what are the contributing factors I mean it's something that is something this small that all of us have experienced is so large and so powerful potentially yet we can't if we sat down to try to list everything that contributed to the school spirit of the high school you went to you'd spend all day and you you couldn't exhaust that list in a day and that's you know putting some work into it a micro nationalism of a kind right and and that's just a school talk about a family which is multi-generational I mean an alcoholic two generations back will have impacts in the present generation now talk about a religious community where you have a figure let's say like Jesus who had a particular body of teaching and then that that that religious community has its own history all this stuff is built into us in ways that we simply don't know because we are these massive cultural absorbers I ask people you let's say you you get married you don't start with a blank piece of paper in your marriage the first draft of your marriage was your parents marriage and there are echoes of all the other relationships back over that divorces second marriages you know I mean all of this stuff is built up into a human being and built up into every manifestation of human community the complexity of what we're talking about now is simply it we don't have enough time in our life to even notate the complexity of what goes into us and first of all it's amazing we function at all that is a flat-out miracle once you begin to see all of the layers and then to realize that well we're in a we're in a we're in a phase right now where institutions are breaking down we've seen those phases before and there are lots of different size cycles too there's like a light a hundred year cycle then there's a 500 year cycle and a you know two thousand year cycle and all of those cycles are manifest inside each other some institutions right now are are buzzing up and they're going to be with us for a couple of centuries others that have been with us for a while are breaking down we see this in governments all the time history is the record of it so there's a there's a lot going on and it's rational that we feel ourselves powerless yet again back to the example of school spirit one person in one class 30 years ago might have had such an impact in school spirit by doing something maybe that person when everybody was mocking the fat kid or the kid was zits or the kid who couldn't play sports that high-status person bent down and befriended that and that changed school spirit for 30 years these things happen and so a lot of it has to do again with salience and attention and and I think you're exactly right about Jordan Peterson I mean he by giving vision he brought agency into people's lives and I mean just look at the impact that we don't know yet the impact Jordan Peterson will have but I've watched it and and I think you know I've some ways to to magnify it because I saw this as a positive thing in people's lives and so I said how can I magnify it well I'll start a meetup I'll start a YouTube channel where this goes I won't live long enough to see I I'm not smart enough to know so it's an amazing thing we're participating in here and I think that this Peterson sort of awakening vision and giving agency that's actually the thing that pissed everybody off about him because people don't want like especially the people who think that we need to fix systems and that the institution needs to be reformed they really did not like him and I think that because I don't want to speak too badly about anyone but they've given themselves over to this ideology they've given themselves over to this these institutional ways system systemic ways of thinking and if someone's coming along and saying no like you've got power that's hard to hear so on to go back to the aren't a little bit that's also the name of our podcast I don't know if you've ever heard of them before Paul my brother professor at Bard Roger Berkowitz who he runs the honor aren't center he founded it and I took a class with him about the origins totalitarianism and one of the first things he said to the class was do you feel powerful he asked the students sort of and single out a few people individually to give an answer and most people said oh no I'm not powerful at all you know I'm just one person especially if someone's all my woman I don't have very much power whatsoever and aren't goes into this idea and she talks about the the wheel of history and how to a certain point the masses saw themselves as being powerless masses caught up in the wheel of history and so they shouldn't really act they should more just kind of go along with things and she has this bit about Lawrence of Arabia and how despite his clear and obvious power influence and vast ability to change the course of human events he still saw himself as caught up in the wheel of history and I see the the woke left sort of grouping of people despite the gains they make they literally had got the mayor of New York City to paint Black Lives Matter outside of Donald Trump's building and they still see themselves as powerless and they don't understand the vast degree of power they've in several short months they've gotten most major corporations around the world to bend a knee to them they've gotten world leaders they've inspired movements around the entire world and countries that don't have very many black people or don't have police brutality problems like the this this ideology has been incredibly influential and like we said earlier powers in some way since the ability to influence others and get them to act if the woke left in America says stand up and raise your fist or kneel down and raise your fist and people in Poland and New Zealand do it they have quite a bit of power and when people have this power and don't recognize that I think that is a very dangerous thing and that's part of that's why aren't talks about this because these people then become just caught up in the wave of whatever happens and she's very critical of movements because movements along with ideology they have to keep moving they have to go somewhere so if you're caught up in a movement like this and you feel powerless you're just gonna keep you know trying you know you're never gonna actually recognize what's going on it's like painting the wall red and you won't even see that you've actually finished painting the wall so you're gonna get a brighter red maybe even some blood that's really good that's really interesting I hadn't really thought of the relationship between movements and having to keep moving but that's a really it's almost simplistic at first when you think about it it's like I read ironically I read something in my like 10th grade we had a sociology knows 12th grade sociology class it was nonsense elect elect if you basically read like several definitions from sociology the professor the teacher was a Arden far right kind of just blowhard who would just copy he copied a graph from graphic from Fox News one time I recognize it in class interesting class but I'm bringing it up because in our sociology textbook it mentioned something about the March of Dimes and how the March of Dimes is an example of a bureaucracy because once I think it was polio was originally once polio stopped being a problem they moved on to the next thing and stayed in existence if you apply that to something like a feminist movement or an anti-racism movement they're a movement so once they meet their goal they're not likely to just disband and say okay we're done they're gonna look for the next place to go I think that hearing that I think it was most likely Berkowitz to explain it to me on that way really helped me see the kind of fallacy in taking up a cause in this way that kind of goes back to the whole handing out human rights degrees issue yeah be really interesting to see what Hannah aren't thought about that there's a long history of history of this I was just I've been working my way through I like these great courses series on audible and I'm doing one in American religious history you know the women's temperance movement was a deeply impactful movement in the 19th early 20th century I mean they I mean prohibition passed I mean you know how difficult it is to pass a constitutional amendment in the United States I mean so last time an important one the ones of what's the last consequential amendment since that yeah the voting age a small difference and when you can vote that's probably the most influential change the Constitution realistically that's happened recently but the women's temperance movement was you know an incredible an incredible movement and it spawned many other movements as well even though today temperance sounds laughable what what prohibition actually did was the the amount of drinking in America after prohibition was significantly less than it was before even though prohibition is considered to be have been a failure and a disastrous public policy the the women's temperance but you can still find temperance halls in certain little niches in America but you know but the temperance movement was in some ways set up by the Second Great Awakening and I mean history history is like that and you know the current woke thing is obviously an heir of Occupy but in many ways it seems to me that you know I've long I've long appreciated the you know study of the civil rights movement Dr. King rose to prominence because they were addressing the the situation on the buses of Montgomery Alabama and they had a specific they had a specific goal and so much of what I've seen by this current movement is okay we're going to strike to end racism okay but racism is something that will never end okay can you be a little more specific here that would really help us all because you know I remember when Colin Kaepernick bent a knee and I thought I'm gonna bend a knee until you know police stop killing black people and I thought you're never gonna get off the stadium for here philosopher stone or something it's gonna take quite a while yeah and and so I think part of the what a lot of effective what have a lot of what a lot of effective people who changed the country in effective ways was well be specific what exactly would you like changed let's talk about that let's debate that but I'm going to I mean let's just go all the way have you seen the list of demands they come out with sometimes they're there eventually they do produce some specifics and they're not there what I've seen a lot of times is vague things about how to finance things without a pay for them and then somewhere at the end it will say free Palestine right and it just I don't you know I like they include some wacky other thing and it just turns into like manifesto rather than actual specific demand I was going through a Dr. King's biography sometime in January which one and the autobiography actually oh it's edited by someone who collected all of his works together and forgetting his name and I was astounded about you they were very specific and they spent one year on a bus boycott in one town it's a very different approach than what people are asking for now and they were trained activists they do yeah the session with your rivers held that spit and you're talking about people who crumple in a slightest bit of wind you know if they think they hear the word the the our word that's enough to send them into a week-long spiral and the movement that seemed to have worked was some of the toughest smartest people around don't think these are some of the toughest smartest people around Dr. King also in his diagnosis of the problem he I think he picked up on this power issue he said that the he uses the word Negro just as a disclaimer I guess but he says the American Negro is suffering from a problem they're suffering from a feeling of nobodies and what we need to inculcate is a feeling of somebody and it seems again to be this this project of imbuing people with more agency I think I think it's it's helpful yeah then dr. Peterson you know clean your room start somewhere do something right and and I you know part of my critique of Peterson was oh there's a lot of people doing things and I think you're right in that this this woke ism is sort of it's it's become a it takes on the characteristics of religion and affords what religion does and that's sort of what has happened with politics that politics has become the religion of people whereas I think religion is is something deeper you know I often say well religion is always in politics is now now not always have a very interesting relationship because you're always living in the now but you're always living in the always but you try to get a sense of your you need a vision the good well you're not gonna you you might attempt to manifest that vision of the good through politics that is that is what politics is for but the politics will not give you a vision of the good politics should give you a vision of the can so this is one of the issues with the woke ism is people starting at politics trying to work backwards to religion rather than starting at religion and moving forward into politics right I think I would disagree with you guys a little bit on that yeah just no not I'm not upset at you guys anything just I look at it more as politics is the kind of a space for generating new ideas between people and it's based it's a fairly Arrentian kind of view of things and that politics is a sort of sphere the public sphere and once you get together and hopefully the newness and some sort of novel idea comes through the sharing of your own reflections with other people and so in especially I look at things in a more secular way there is almost they could you don't have to be I'm not saying you have to do it secularly but in a secular sense it would kind of be just like I don't know what the proper term is but it almost be like us idea generating like a forum type thing and from there I don't I don't know that I would agree that you need some sort of religious and you can almost replace it maybe with a discussion of where we're going as a community kind of Arrent's religion is Socrates and the ancient Greeks and Romans like it's not it's not religion with it's not a deistic religion but her her where she gets her vision of the good comes from people like Socrates or maybe Virgil Plato early early America too she had really admired the coffee houses it's like certain periods in world history or there where she thought there's open exchange of ideas yeah she's not trying to construct a vision of the good from scratch and you know working that way she does still go into the past to find like she she still she still grounds it in philosophy right it's not just politics all the way up she yeah it's not disconnected from the right right so Ethan when you how do you define religion well so that's that's a good question because I took some religious religious studies class with Raj at Bard and we learned about how religion is a fairly new term and it actually I correct me where I'm wrong but I think it means to repeat over and over again and so this was roots yeah yeah so this what was the year Roger people started to refer to sort of a concrete concrete drink too much coffee yeah concretize I drank too much coffee I'm getting a little jittery moving around a little but it's sorted the idea that you have a worldview versus religion I think kind of changed in history so before people never said oh I have a religion if I remember children's class correctly and so for when I use the term religion I'm kind of using it to mean both that sort of like how you view the world and also the process of engage going to church praying but also in the sense of like a an um belt almost like a belted shaft world view the way that you look at the world and so to me from a religious perspective is kind of basing it upon what your conception of God is and that's the fundamental basic working and so if you when I say like a religious sense I mean connected to a sort of belief in God and a way that you go about acting on that belief is that if that makes sense when do you know the story of Agamemnon sacrificing his daughter for fair winds from Artemis that's in sounds vaguely in the Iliad where our Agamemnon of course Menelaus his wife Helen stole away to Troy to and Agamemnon wants to go with Menelaus and get his get his he captured the wind so well Artemis Artemis has a little beef with with Agamemnon because he killed one of her sacred deer and so he needs he needs the proper winds to get to Troy and in order to do that he sacrifices his daughter which his wife takes issue with but that you know the question of religion goes into was was that a religious act of Agamemnon sacrificing his daughter because part of I don't you might you might be interested in an English historian named Tom Holland who's been working on a bunch of these issues because he made the same observation he said you know it's true of the Bible as well you can only find the word religion in English translations like two or three times in the Bible and you'd think for a religious book you'd think they'd use the word and and and so the question I think is of religion is what is the most basic level of what the world is for and how it works that I think is the religious layer I see politics more as the layer of how can we how can we approach those more foundational values in the now how can we realize them in our present community and I use I use that that framework sometimes as opposed to the idea that you know religious is is what people do when they go to church because you're quite right that's a fairly new idea and it's it's sort of an idea which you know it grows out of the American experience you know nine out of the 13 original colonies had state churches and it's only the federal level that was secular partly pragmatically because you weren't going to get the the New England Puritans to necessarily agree with some of the the southern Anglicans so you know I think when we're talking about ultimate values what is good that's that's how I'm using the term religious here and and then we're very much worldview in a sense and politics is more the the practicality of what kind of policy do we need what kind of institutions do we need to accomplish that which we say as good I think the act of deciding and coming together to have a common good is a political act I would see that as politics so you have a forum and you say you know we need to fix this problem but first like let's say the local pool is is defunct it needs to be fixed and some people don't want to fix it some people do you kind of have to decide if you're going to fix it that one of our common goods and investing in the community or community resources and I do see there's a kind of like aren't would say it's a private sphere where you would that was where those kind of private conversations happen where you think with your like one in yourself you're thinking reflecting yourself on what is good or maybe talking to your wife or maybe I don't know the church would count as public or private necessarily but talking to people in your congregation etc there is I think there is some sort of space that's non-political where these conversations maybe start but some sense of agreeing on a common good I think needs to be or just is political because people are talking with each other in a sort of public way to decide on where to go I don't know that people think good is a function we don't people pursue the good with politics but they know the good with religion do so this was a rise you remember we talked about this I would not be able to tell you where it is in the Bible hopefully one of you guys know maybe it was in names I think the quotation is the will of God is written on the heart of all men are you familiar with that quote I hope I'm not misquoting that I hope that's correct Raj do you remember talking about this before that's not ringing a bell but the idea I think machine to plug words into and see where they came from on the heart of all men and ideas kind of people are born with some sort of knowledge of morality but I think that in in a certain sense in a pluralistic community you might have to discard that I don't know what I don't know if I'm the idea that there is a common like you could factually say this is good versus not good hmm I think that's a that's a riff on eyes on Jeremiah 31 oh I found something from let's see new living translation of Romans 2 15 they demonstrate that God's law is written in their hearts yes it might have I think you're right it might have been some sort of quotation of a quotation or some sort of version of whatever but if you catch my drift in the idea that people know do that do people know intrinsically what's good and it's just a matter of listening to your conscience or is there a process by which we need to rationally or logically figure out what good is so I think the the seek answer to that question is that God is inside of you right like God is resides within each individual but then you have to tear away this veil of Maya you have to get in touch with such you have to get in touch with truth and you do that through meditating on the scripture meditating on truth early in the morning there's an emphasis on doing it early in the morning for some reason and there is like you're supposed to spend this time there is an aspect of this reflection that our rent is talking about too in that and at least in this in the seek conception God is ever-existent God creates the world and he creates the the name the nom his name and then through the name he enters into creation and then what the guru keeps trying to do is telling you how to recognize the name how to realize that you're living in the name and they do that with Barney which is or Shabbat which is the word so there's these kind of like weird little parallels between what's going on over in the Bible with the use of the word and the logos and stuff like that but these all have different etymological origins but there is something about like in it like Plato right Plato says everything is remembering all knowledge is remembering that you knew what was you knew but then when you come into this world the like there's this process of because it has to do with what like mathematics being like this abstraction this abstraction that like you can figure out mathematics intuitively to a certain degree so the idea that people can recognize what the good is I think if they're oriented properly the question is how do you orient but yeah Paul it's a complicated question in terms of the Bible because Jeremiah 31 is is a prophecy that God will they will the world will be full of the knowledge of God as though as the waters cover the sea that's not an unusual metaphor in the Bible Romans 1 talks about the wrath of God is being revealed from heaven against all godlessness and wickedness of people who suppress the truth by their wickedness in other words we are motivated we are motivated to suppress the truth because we want to do some things for since the creation of the world God's invisible qualities his eternal power and divine nature has been clearly seen being understood from what has been made so that people are without excuse for although they knew God they neither glorified him as God nor gave thanks to him but their thinking became futile and foolish and their foolish hearts were darkened and so there's there's a lot of there's there's a lot of complexity in this knowing the good and and in the in the in the midst of human life it's often very difficult to know the good so if there's a homeless person asleep on the sidewalk here what is the good is the good to rouse them because this is not a good place to live is the good to give them $20 is the good to put them in my car and take them to a shelter is the good to take them to my home is the good to open a i mean it's it's again with with humanity things get very complicated very fast but but i guess just in terms of nomenclature you know i try to churches are highly political organizations because churches have in a sense a certain degree of of of commonality with respect to the good they even have a book they have in common they have all of this stuff yeah you know one of the before i got here one of the biggest fights this church ever had was do they put blue carpeting on the stage or red and that became this massive fight blue or red and and then you know certain people who give certain amount of money and other people and color and socioeconomic class and did they grow up within the denomination or did they come in later i mean church there's no politics like church politics because it's so close to the good and and and i think that's part of why i think secularization has heightened a lot of these tensions in our culture because Miroslav Volf who who was a young man in the the the breakup of of communist yugoslavia wrote about how for for former communists who believed that this world was all there is well you've got a little window to to derive for yourself all the blessings and all the the beneficial experience you will ever get you know and and hey baby the clock is ticking you're only going to be 20s in your 20s for so long and then in your 30s and 40s and and what life is is massive potential via the clock you know running out of time well people tend to get more and more violent and desperate as things run out because it's up to me to secure it now at least with religious people who have a belief in an afterlife well i can sacrifice here because you know there will be there will be payback in the life to come if you don't believe that well now suddenly you have a zero-sum game where it's my good life or it's your good life i choose me right this is uh something you brought up i think in your conversation with the folks over at unsafe space yeah that um the woke left they are really um preoccupied with the notion of justice but they're trying to get perfect justice in this world and it's like i don't know if that's possible guys and uh you're probably going to turn into antifa pretty quick of what you're trying to secure is perfect justice that's right because i think though they're oh no go ahead what do we want it you know what do we want justice when do we want it now one person in a comment said when i see someone who wants it now i run away because now is a pretty small window right i think um that's an interesting concept of that somehow uh religion ameliorate ameliorates personal desires is that what you're saying in in favor of some grander afterlife um i'm not really too much of i don't know too much about the specifics of like demographics in soviet or communist china but i'm as far as i remember reading there was people were still largely religious it was mostly if the state silenced them from expressing religious uh tendencies i think maybe later generations were born within communism that tended to change but um in my experience with religious versus non-religious people i think i've almost seen the opposite a lot of times where this religious well maybe not use this maybe not use the term religion this um faith that they have their faith gives them a sort of personal righteousness and especially if you think about something like uh the doctrine of wealth or like extreme calvinism if you are doing well in life you think oh god's on my side he's for me and then you're you're more you might be more inclined in some senses to then pray upon your workers and say look you know god put them in the position of the workers i'm the boss i deserve to be able to take advantage of them a little make a little bit more money pay them less maybe um i'm not saying i'm not saying anything negative about religious people necessarily just that i've maybe seen i've seen that in non-religious people too you know if there's no uh you know dagger over their head some people will just run wild in the streets and do whatever because they don't see any consequences but i do i have seen the opposite where um i think people who are fairly uh faithful or have some sort of strong faith they kind of it they use it to uh explain or um i can't think of the term i'm looking they basically use that as a crutch so to get away with things that they they know deep down aren't correct i well i've seen human beings have a tremendous capacity to justify what they want to do i'll say that uh being a calvinist minister i've never seen um a lot of these things often attributed to calvinism that i often hear i know i know mostly calvinists i know more percentage wise i know more calvinists than most people um the the i i do find that human beings will you know when human beings find something they want they will find ways to justify and get it that is that is that is really human and religion is a part of that religious excuses and i'll tell you there there are no games like religious games and if you you could see them played out in church there's a i mean to pick on calvin no no no just as an example of uh you like any sort of uh like you're saying if people want something if they want wealth they're then going to their political ideology their faith is going to justify their quest for wealth um so maybe it's not specific to faith at all there is a paper that i had to read in grad school about um it was investigating empirically whether religion causes violence which is something that people like dawkins and sam harris like to claim uh that religion is the cause of violence in this empirical study i'm forgetting who wrote it i'll try and track it down maybe post it in our show notes um and said that it's not obvious that religion causes violence more likely what is happening is that there is a clash of multiple identity groups and religion is used as a justification to assert power of one identity over the other identity and it's like religion is a very powerful tool for motivating people because i think um um evolutionarily we are built for religion um and so you it's a very um you can activate and wake people up using the tool of religion or using religious like speech rituals using incantations all those sorts of things are very powerful things that uh um awaken people to act but to say that it's um to say that the fault lies in the religious system itself rather than maybe how a person is yielding it um i think those are two very different claims and they don't necessarily um i don't think that that bears out in the facts the the tools that religions have offered the world are some of the most powerful tools for colonizing human beings ever known how do we know that because they've endured because they're still here all the bad tools um in terms of tools that are least effective you know i would i would i i i break it down basically like this the world is far too complex for any of us to manage one of the earliest ways that we learn to manage the complexity of the world is via narrative and in fact we have we we manage our lives via narrative we manage our identity via narrative we manage our community via narrative narrative is the most powerful it's about one of the most powerful human human um complexity management tools we have religions are in many ways just enormously powerful successful narratives that human beings have used not only to manage the complexity internally but manage the community externally for us to actually accomplish something other political narratives as well but the religious narratives are far older and far more enduring because governments come and go but religions you know sikhism christianity's 2000 judaism you know older than that hinduism religions are the narratives that have endured longer than any other narrative on the human shelf political narratives they're relative newcomers right also based on immediacy a lot of times too like if there's a war coming your political ideology is going to be more um bellicose etc but if your mission of a religion is more to understand the world or prescribe how people should act that is going to have just more enduring quality then like the political ideologies that have endured are mostly i think more vague like liberalism communism it's not giving you necessarily the specific there's no necessarily ten commandments it's more of a here's a general way we should organize our society yeah so they'll know um it is going to be a quite a long conversation so we might want to think about wrapping up i'm having a great time but um i don't know how many people want to listen to us for over two hours you'd be surprised you never know um but i also i think that we have we could talk about i don't know if you had fun paul but i'd definitely be down to maybe switch tracks and talk again about something else or take a deeper dive into science specifics this is pretty illuminating for me yeah we could we could do it again i'm sure um i i do this all the time it's enjoyable i'm glad you don't live in sacramento we can i was thinking now now that the governor's saying we can do stuff outside i'm thinking of getting the meetup back together so yeah i'm definitely planning on visiting california at some point it's possible to plan anything right now with this uh epidemic going on but um i'll be over there eventually and um yeah i'll definitely bring them to a meetup if it's happening yeah that'll be interesting i was i was reading about um somebody else did you know you guys might know his name someone else had been doing jordan peterson meetups somewhere in california and um it appeared that it folded pretty quickly um so i was surprised to hear that there was still like a continuing thing going on because i haven't really heard too much about him recently i was never really terribly enamored with him i thought he's interesting he kind of had a good outlook i'm telling people to kind of you know buck up put on your big boy pants um and uh but i wasn't particularly like taken with his his larger ideology but it's interesting to see that there that has inspired such a long series of meetups oh yeah that's uh with there's a discord server um bridges of meaning that was sort of spun out from our local meetup and uh i don't know how many jordan peterson meetups are going on anymore um my group wanted to rename it jordan peterson style meetups because we don't actually talk about him much but it jordan became a way for people to find each other who were sort of interested in similar conversations and and i think you know i someone had told david um david fuller he's he's one of the founders of rebel wisdom out of the uk um he had said that you know the idw is not necessarily the content on the hard drives it's the internet protocol between them and so in some ways the the idw space is i think a a conversational culture by which we have an opportunity to share ideas the notion of oh go ahead rosh i was just going to say that the notion of the great conversation that has spanned over well the western canon it's actually finally turning into a living conversation on the internet and youtube space and stuff like that it's a really fascinating shift to watch well i was looking at more in terms of like a carl schmidt thing where what is this politics is about differentiating friends from enemies when i look at the intellectual dark web i kind of see people of the shared enemy and um that's correct me if you think i'm wrong but there's this specter of danger in society that's getting people to band together and that was kind of why i was interested in this podcast is kind of being one of the little thought bubbles amongst the various people talking and trying to get more of a community built between these like small networks so like there's x podcast group we all get together and talk and then we talk to the other podcast group and have cross conversations so i've had so many people who are like you start talking about being critical of any any sort of popular reductive narrative that people aren't fond of and they're like oh my god it feels so good to be able to talk about this there's like a sense of relief like no i don't know anyone who enjoys saying latin x unless it's some sort of performative action to get their other woke friends to pat them on the back but when you finally say like i think that's bullshit people kind of oh okay i think it's bullshit too thanks um i think that i hadn't i can't remember it the coffee's getting to my brain again but um something about like deep breath or something like sometimes that concept of not orienting around a specific idea or person but um kind of like taking a deep breath side of being able to almost like a confessional i think um like i think it does take on a kind of confessional quality in these sort of meetup conversations where you're like i i believe this to be true and it's not about necessarily being judged but sort of confessional absent of any judgment or punishment yeah yeah um my experience do you mind if i say two things then you can say one thing rush no go ahead you well i want i wanted to actually do a really want to i wanted to do a plug uh for our next episode but i don't know if that would be uh uncouth but we're actually going to be talking to benjamin voice next week oh good yeah um and then i had this ethan and i we spent a lot of time thinking about rn and i've got this one quote that i kind of want to run by you that uh it just keeps sticking with me keeps popping up in my mind every time we talk about woke ideology um every generation civilization is invaded by barbarians we call them children um it seems to be we have a lot of kids running around and i know ethan and i aren't that old but that's a great quote because it's every you know now i'm in my 50s now and i have five children and children are formed by their worlds but as i said earlier worlds are enormous the world is a normal enormously complex thing so you have five children you begin to realize they're all different you know every single one of those five children i had was different that same two parents and they were all different and two parents same two you know biological you know genetic pools but different things and where they are in the birth order their unique experiences but they all have to sort of be socialized into the conversation and then there are you know knowing that with zero to zero to six there's one segment like six to twelve and then twelve to twenty and now they're all in their 20s and i'm watching them go through their stuff and now more and more in contact with the world i mean it's it's it's a we are we are enormously blessed um we live in a we live in a wonderful age in many respects um we have these tools i mean we're talking video conferencing across the country right now we're going to post it and other people are going to listen to our conversation and gosh you know the the we live in amazing amazing times and you know one of the things that jordan peterson often talked about which i think was exactly right a little bit of gratitude and a little bit of humility would uh would serve us well because compared to much of what has happened in human history wow do we have it good and and that goodness was was purchased by the sacrifices of previous generations and then at some point ask ourselves what are we leaving to successing succeeding generations important i was in um nicaragua for three months in 2014 i think and that every day was a visceral reminder of how goddamn lucky i am to live in america and to have been born in america in this time period and um like i literally every second year i mean it's a great place not disparaging the country at all or the people especially but you're constantly reminded of how lucky you are to have glass in your windows there aren't poisonous stakes that the dogs don't have rabies you don't have dogs chasing around in the street um you can drink whatever water you get out of a tap in most places in america i know we have clinton whatever but um you know it's and it's really i think that's really important thing to recognize and especially i went grew up in troy new york it's not a very wealthy place and then i went to bard college which is and it was filled with these resentful ingrates who couldn't appreciate the fact that they're in the safest one of the most beautiful places in the whole world and it was just like this that's part of the reason i went to nicaragua because i was like i want to go my ex-girlfriend had family there so we had like a trip plan i want to go experience the world and see you know are they telling the truth is bard actually the worst place in america are we really oppressed or is it actually quite the opposite and it appeared to me to be quite the opposite and uh me and raj have a friend who's a tibetan refugee um and so he had his own take which is very similar which is like fucking lucky to be here it's awesome it's amazing to be in america and going to this college and you know no one's shooting me if i take the wrong turn etc yeah yeah all right well thank you all thank you and i um i have a copy of it and i don't know if you guys you know you guys were recording this i've got a i've got a copy too um so you you put you you're gonna post it on friday or you're gonna want to edit it but just let me know i mean i and you can decide when you'd like me to post it and just that it fits into my posting schedule too and okay um there um once as soon as you would probably post it i could post it tomorrow i mean i i don't edit um so we can uh there's no real reason to edit any of this but um we can um we'll post it tomorrow as well we've got a backup episode um that we recorded a couple of weeks ago we'll release that on friday okay well send me send me the links that you'd like me to include any if you got twitter handles or any personal information you'd like me to include in the notes and i'll put it in the notes okay sounds good thank you great guys great conversation bye