https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vDvrVAbobZY

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to do a quick video. It might not be quick. Words that fudge. Literal. Literal has become a very fudgy word. Now, the second month in a row, I'm gonna pick up on Jonathan Peugeot's December, December Patreon question and answer. And I feel bad for John because he's an artist and he's getting a pastoral question. So let's hear what this person asked him because it's a good question. Okay, so how do I explain to my friends and family in a succinct way that I believe in religion, but I don't think heaven is a literal place? Seems very nuanced and that I'm playing word tricks to an onlooker. I'm having a hard time articulating that obviously Santa Claus is real. Obviously Santa Claus exists in a way that makes sense and doesn't make me sound crazy. Any advice? What's Jonathan Hankey? I'm gonna say that it's tough. I think it's tough that if you're trying to explain it to Mormons, I think it's really tough. The person asking the question is a Mormon and they explained that too. And Mormons, well, I'll talk about that as I get into the answer. Because because Mormons do believe in that God, I mean, I don't know. This is, I'm not a Mormon. Okay, it's helpful to remember when and where the LDS church arose, which was in what was called the Burned Over District. That was upstate New York. And the two great awakenings had burned through that district of upstate New York. And the reason it was called Burned Over is because no one else could be saved. And what, because everyone was saved. Everyone was so saved that in fact, what you had was a whole series of sects that grew out of that area. The Oneida community that I talk about in a number of videos was up there. The LDS group grew out of there. Jehovah's Witnesses, the Millerites, a lot of groups grew out of there. There was an intense millennial fervor that grew out of that region. But the LDS group grew out of there. There was an intense millennial fervor that grew out of that region. But now what's important to remember is when these groups start. Now these groups are starting in the 19th century and you're getting peak modernity in the 19th century. So there are some very materialistic philosophical assumptions that are deeply embedded in the culture and the language that regular people are not going to be aware of. One of the interesting things in this particular question and answer that Jonathan is dealing with is the question of symbolic language versus well there's the thing. Because human beings naturally work symbolically. And that's really what Jonathan has excelled at in terms of exploring that and articulating that and trying to articulate that. Now the difficulty is that symbolic language for a certain class of people and Jonathan explains this a little bit later in the video. Symbolic language for a certain class of people has become a foreign language. But not really. They still deal with symbolism and metaphor on a daily basis. They're just not aware they are doing it. And that is this naive use of language that we all have. When you're raised in a language in a culture you have a naive use of that language in the culture and you just use it. Now when you have a boundary area like symbolism versus and we're going to use this word literalism because that's symbolic versus literal. That's the pairing. Or metaphorical versus literal. That's the pairing. A couple of videos ago I mentioned that language has a residue of the 19th century positivism. We began to imagine that language always relates just to one thing. So here's a cell phone. Here's a cell phone holder. That language has like this one to one relationship. And whereas that's certainly true but language more works in terms of relations with each other. Especially when we get into complex and difficult concepts or ideas that aren't that can't be nailed down to one specific thing. Paul VanderKlay. To the best of my knowledge I am the only Paul VanderKlay on planet Earth. I am the only Paul VanderKlay that spells his last name the way I do in all of human history. Partly because Ellis Island made some decisions that got put into the stream. And so the way I spell my name is unique. Now I dare bet it may not be that way. But when you say Paul VanderKlay it refers to me. But right away things can get complex because how long am I me. So on and so forth. But the language is always working in concert with other words. All right. So that kind of positivism that was present in the culture got built into LDS theology. And they were trying to articulate within their worldview their ideas. And so then you wind up with God living on planets because this is the 19th century. They're aware of planets for for the 19th century. You're on a globe spinning. The earth is spinning around the sun. That's in the 19th century. If you look at the first chapter of Genesis it's a table with a dome. That's the cosmology of the ancient Near East. Now the difficulty we have when we came into this literalistic frame was that OK you had this this fight that was brewing in the 19th century. The modernist fundamentalist flight fight that both of which remember I had I talked about the fork both of which had the assumption down the shared part of the fork that they're not paying any attention to because they're paying attention to this part of the fight. And they're not paying attention to the shared part of the fight. And so all of that is built into the LDS church. And so you have a literal father. Well now we need a literal mother and God on a literal planet and the the the deified children of God quite literally. So all of this language takes on a literalistic framework that makes a lot of sense in the time and space in which the religion emerged because of the particular cultural context. Now they also tended to if you read their scriptures they tend to I hope no one takes offense at what I'm about to say. But I remember when I read the Book of Mormon and I thought boy this sounds a lot like the King James Bible. Doesn't sound like the Greek doesn't sound like the Hebrew sounds like the King James. It's because of when the when it emerged from. Now you also have to understand the LDL the LDS church has a mechanical view of mechanical inspiration. So Joseph Smith using the seeing stones wrote down transcribed what was on the plates of gold. That's all built into the cultural conception of that time and place. And that's why this word literal is really important and problematic. And now Jonathan is going to try to wade into this briar. And let's see what he does with it. Poor Jonathan. What I understand of Mormon teaching is that Mormons do actually think that God is on is like on another planet or that something like that or that when you die you go to this planet in the cosmos. And that you're kind of on this planet and then you can also create you can become a god and then you can create a world and then those people are going to go on planets. And so so it's very very it seems very materialistic at least in my perception. I don't know if that's if that's totally our good understanding of it. But I think that the only way I think to to how people understand that heaven isn't a literal place in the sense that it's a. And right away a whole bunch of evangelicals just got ticked off. This is the problem with this word. And we run into it all the time because of the 19th and 20th century modernist fundamentalist fight. But OK Jonathan keep going. It's a place like like your house. Like I said it's going to be tough if you're talking to Mormons. I mean I always ask people because people will say things crazy things like people will say you know Christ Christ. OK so here's a good way here's a good way here's a good way now. Everybody uses the word spiritual OK and so. Don't use that word. We're going to have to use it but oh that's the first word that fudges and now we're on to the second. Maybe try to get people to explain to you what they mean by by spiritual. Right. Because people have very different meanings and it's important for them to understand what they mean by it. Chances are again they're using it naively and I don't mean that pejoratively. I just mean there they have assumed conceptions of the word that they're bringing to the use of the word. And it's within that context that they're trying to employ it. Because usually people will say something like spiritual is none non material things or something that's not material. Right. So so we have symbolic or metaphorical being paired with literal. Now and again this is this is what I did a video a little earlier today than I'm going to post before this one where I get into Plato and the forms with Verkeke. Verkeke Verkeke I always want to say Verkeke because it's more Dutch Verkeke. And understanding what he says when he walks walks through Aristotle is so helpful to figure out a lot of these dilemmas. This this formal cause which is lost to us. But it's a super helpful concept. So so you've got symbolic versus literal. And you've got at least in many people's conception material and you don't really know what we're saying when we're saying that. And spiritual and as a pastor who works in a church anyone who's been in my Sunday school class. Well I've trained them now for years but if they throw out the word spiritual I'm going to stop them in their tracks. I'm going to tell them I'm going to ask them to define it and they can't. And then I'm going to poke around in in their minds in their worldview and try and locate this word for them. And so everything goes for literal because so then suddenly you line things up you say OK material literal metaphorical spiritual. Those aren't bad pairings. But again things get slippery fast. And so maybe try to get them to talk a little bit about what that means like what it is what it's what is spiritual. And so once you start to kind of talk about what something spiritual is meaning that it's not physical then you can try to say something like well you know the word spiritual. It just means when just means I really don't think this is going to help your Mormon friends. This is so hard. What you're talking about these spiritual things do you do you think that that they're in your physical breath. You think that like when I when I blow on someone that I am that that that's what it means by spiritual something. See now and we've talked about principalities and powers and I think we've really made some good progress thinking about principalities and powers and thinking about why don't again I don't have any Apple devices here. I've just got a few in my but but there's the principality and power of Apple and he started talking about principalities and powers a little bit earlier in this video. So now you're connecting and and and Jonathan is exactly right because in terms of the language these things all line up. The the the wind was over the waters in Genesis one and you read a Christian translation of the Bible the spirit. And again if you watch my Sunday school class I pay attention to what's in translations and I often line the translations up next to each other and I pay attention which translation is capitalizing what. Now most of the time when people are reading the Bible they just blow right through that. There's different word different use of blow. They it's kind of they blow right through that but you really can't because you have a capital S or you get a small less. Which spirit are we talking about what is fact when in fact is a spirit. Jordan Peterson in the in the the Ben Shapiro Dave Rubin talks about this spirit under the world talks about the spirit of masculinity. And as he talks about that and he and he as he frames it sufficiently we begin to get an understanding of spirit and we can begin to get an understanding of what spirit is now. Again I go back to see us Lewis's book miracles and and see us Lewis notes that right now spirit is dominating the use of my hands and spirit is colonizing and controlling the use of this computer. Well what do you mean spirit is well. This this this this thing that is Paul VanderKlaai this this story this this process that is moving through time that is that is Paul VanderKlaai that has personhood and identity and volition and will. This the spirit is moving these hands and picking up this logitech trackball available on Amazon dot com. I'm lining up sponsors like crazy show me the money patrons going belly up what's a YouTuber supposed to do. This is too much fun. So so then you throw in the word literal and it doesn't reside well in that universe and this is where Jonathan is stumbling and I'm not going to pretend that I'm going to somehow make things crystal clear on I'm hoping I can make a contribution. To it because it is again it is really hard and as a pastor and this is where Jonathan's an artist who's moonlighting as a YouTube I'm a pastor who's moonlighting as a YouTuber as a pastor I pace very close attention to hear to hear how a lot of people use language especially certain of these terms like literal and spiritual because remember I said spiritual metaphorical they clump those things together. Then you had material and material and spiritual they clump those together so suddenly they're aligning literal and material and they're aligning metaphorical and spiritual and again those aren't bad pairs but you've got to slow down and pay attention to the detail especially when one of these words that fudge comes down towards you in a sentence because boy I'll tell you you're going to get hung up quickly because you're talking to more people. I don't believe in a literal heaven boom you've just walked into the minefield and no man's land of the modernist fundamentalist fight that is still with us and is embedded into the LDS experience and embedded into their theology that's why it's handy to have Christian traditions that predate this and Jonathan's tradition the orthodox tradition is very important to have. And so you'll find I dare bet others who have appropriated now these conflicts and they're at work in their world today well let's let poor Jonathan finish up. And most people will say obviously no and then you can try to help them understand well you think that like when I when I blow on someone that I am that that that's what it means by spiritual something. And most people will say obviously no and then you can try to help them understand well it's because when you blow when you that's also speaking speaking is air that. Okay when you blow on someone a person most of the people in our culture are going to understand that in multiple ways. Okay so you're standing next to someone and you blow on them what's going through their mind. First of all if you ask them to describe this now I'm going to introduce a word here that I think is really helpful in this conversation physically. They will say you have expelled air molecules through your lungs and they have now passed across my skin and I felt it. Now let's say I'm standing next to a person I'm a big guy. Okay let's say I'm standing next to someone I want to intimidate someone I was a campus cop in college and so you know I used to play a lot of those intimidation games because I had no real power but my goal was to get students who weren't quite sure of the power I had to do what I wanted to which is usually cough up their alcohol. It was a dry campus. So I stand over someone and I breathe on them. Okay what does that mean. Well that's now we're dealing with within a relational space and there's a physical aspect to it. I'm large. I've got a big nose and my beak is looking down at you and I'm breathing on you and I'm leaning over you and I say open the trunk. And one of the things I learned as a campus cop was sometimes give people a short direct quick command and they'll they'll kind of bypass their reason and they'll do it. And so they'll open their trunk and they'll be the beer and I'll pull it out and they'll pour it out and they'll be all ticked off because this poor college student just spent their money on beer and I just poured it in the parking lot and they're not happy with me but I've always had a thick skin. So what's in the breath. Well it's yeah I just moved air on them. The wind was blowing. That didn't make any difference. But because I'm large and because I was wearing a uniform and because I was leaning over them and because I breathed on them. Well suddenly was there something spiritual happening there. Well yeah. So something physical happened. Something relational happened. Now I'm going to add another word that's hopefully going to going to clarify a little bit. Something relational happened. Now I'm going to line up physical over with material and literal and I'm going to line up relational over with spiritual and metaphorical. But all of this is all connected. And so in that moment the physical and the relational leaned in to cause something to happen. Plus it was a Christian campus. The person probably is feeling a little guilty about smuggling their beer onto campus and they didn't know what I couldn't couldn't do to them and how much trouble they would get into. So there's lots of layers all happening here at the same time. How can we talk about the kinds of things we read in the Bible when in the Bible God created the heavens and the earth and things have multiple meanings. So the heavens. What do we mean by the heavens. We mean this blue sky above us that has clouds and it has stars and that's where God lives. And so Jonathan Pajot is really terrific as where's God. Ask a child. Up. Where's the bad place. Down. Now this is built into us in ways we don't fully understand. Now again I told the story previous videos the cosmonauts go up and they look up into the heavens and they say oh there is no God. And CS Lewis comes back and says you don't look for God that way. Well what do you mean. How how can we think about this and CS Lewis employs Dorothy Sayers terrific illustration that I keep reworking with tolls with with Tolkien and say oh here's the question. If you're Frodo and you're looking for Tolkien in Middle Earth where will you find him. Well one hand you could say you won't find him. J.R. Tolkien is not in Middle Earth. What do you mean he's not in Middle Earth. Well he's kind of in Middle Earth. He's everywhere in Middle Earth and I talked to. I can't remember his name Benjamin yesterday Benjamin Boyce. I talked to Benjamin Boyce and I actually use this in some other conversations really. Tolkien is in a sense everywhere in Middle Earth. He's in Gandalf and he's in Aragorn and he's in the he's in the map and he's in the orcs and and Tolkien is all over the place. But Tolkien is not in Middle Earth the way the cosmonauts imagine they could find God once they get up out of the atmosphere and. Mormons will know this Christians will know this and so that's when people start trying to appropriate scientific words to try to make sense of it. So it's in another dimension. Okay well what do you mean by that. Well I don't know what I mean by that. I just found that word and thought that would be cool because I saw it in a Star Trek show. Okay fine. That's the way you're using it. Okay let's get back to this word literal. Literal metaphorical. You're killing me literally. Boy we're fudging up that word bad when we use it that way and Saturday Night Live and Mad TV they've done. I don't remember one of them. I think Mad TV used to have this this regular sketch on there. When I say you're killing me literally. You're using literally for emphasis and that fudgy use of the word is indicative of what happened in the 19th century with respect to the modernist fundamentalist feud which in fact was something that was building in through the Reformation and on past it. And this is why this is why Jonathan Peugeot's commitment in terms of the Orthodox faith is really interesting and his practice as an icon carver is really interesting because something's going on in language because what we've what we've what we've been when we connect literal with the Well you're killing me really. What do we mean by that? We mean really. Is it just in terms of intensification? Yeah. But we're not going to be doing that. But what we mean is that what's snuck into the language is that the literal is the real and the metaphorical is not. But we actually are not going to be doing that. Let's look at some other things that which which again in our materialist con in our materialist frame. Is it just in terms of intensification? Yeah. But what we mean is that what's snuck into the language is that the literal is the real and the metaphorical is not. But we actually don't talk that way at all. Let's look at some other things that which which again in our materialist con in our materialist frame. Our have no essence because they have no matter. Let's look at a marriage. Okay. What is a marriage? We say well there's a marriage license. Well the marriage license isn't the marriage. It just bears witness to the marriage. Well it's what is it? It's a relationship. It's a relationship between two people. It's a relationship between two people. Is it real? Oh yeah it's real. It can be a very real thing. It can make your life really happy. It can make your life really miserable. And if you violate it your spouse will tell you. Okay. It's a very real thing. Is it physical? Well you express your marriage physically. But it's not physical. You can't point to it. In one video I think it was a meetup or perhaps that I said you know would anyone would anyone name their marriage? And it actually wouldn't be a bad thing to sit down because if you name it you're actually categorizing it. Maybe that's one of the things that you and your spouse should negotiate. Jordan Peterson did a little thing with Dr. Oz with a couple in trouble in their marriage and I won't go there. I've got a lot of thoughts about that. So does marriage exist literally? See now I've just messed you up because we so quickly take literal, material, physical and we line them up. Does marriage exist physically? Well you'd say well there's a physical expression of it. Yeah there's a lot of physical expressions of it. There's physical expressions of it all over the place. Does marriage exist spiritually? Well now people are kind of stuck because some people who are comfortable with the word spiritual will say yeah I can see that. Other people will say they'll get nervous. Again these words are very deep and they're tying into very deep things and they're very slippery right now in our context. So then we get to the question is the Bible literally true? Well of that sentence the Bible is the not a non-complex but the easiest thing to identify. True? Well which conception of truth do you mean? Literal? Well what people mostly mean is that when blind Bartimaeus was outside of Jericho what did Jesus say? Well right away you've got the synoptic problem because the synoptics disagree on that. Well what are you going to do with that disagreement? And in fact it's not just in the synoptics. These kinds of things run through the Bible and then people will point to that and say aha inconsistencies therefore not true. Well Genesis 1 has this vision of a firmament which is like a bowl and then I'll ask people and you know people will get ticked at me sometimes and say well where are the sun moon and the stars? Above or below the firmament? And if they'll read it carefully and they'll say below. Okay what's above the firmament? Well the waters. Well you might consider that the entire known universe that we look out with telescopes of various kinds. You might say well what's outside the universe? Well maybe it's a firmament with waters out there. Or I'll say well okay what happened to those waters above? Why doesn't the space shuttle go through the waters above? The space shuttle doesn't go to the moon. I've said that before which is a really dumb thing to say. Why didn't the Apollo mission have to go through the waters above? Because people say well the waters above are the clouds. No the waters above are. That's not what they're talking about with the waters above. So again right away this literal language gets us into trouble. And it doesn't get us into the. These are the words that fudge. These are so hard. So then I'll just throw illustrations at people and I'll say things like okay so you're demanding a biblical cosmology. Are you insisting on a biblical anatomy? Or do you go to a doctor who has refused all modern science and has only studied the Bible in order to know what it is you learn or what it is you need to know about the human body? Now I haven't found anyone who does that. At least nobody living and that might be telling. Why? Because this word literal it is not doing for you what you want it to do for you. So let's get back to the question. How could this person talk to his family? Well let's again let's use this illustration of Tolkien and if you ask Frodo. Okay let's say Frodo is down with the existence of Tolkien. Where is Tolkien's house? Tolkien's house apparently when he was writing The Lord of the Rings was on Northmoor Road. And you know here it is. Here's Tolkien's house. Could Frodo get to Tolkien's house from Middle Earth? How far from Middle Earth was Tolkien's house? Well you might say Tolkien's house wasn't far at all from Middle Earth. Frodo was practically a member of that family. Was Frodo in the house? And you can see right away that this word literal isn't going to help you much because you could at least in this physical space that we share we could go over if we were living a number of years ago and touch Tolkien. When we touched Tolkien were we touching Frodo or Gandalf? See right away you begin to realize that the tools that we're bringing to the problem, the tools that we're bringing to the situation are not helping us. And you begin to understand why the LDS Church imagined God on a planet because they were trying to put their God in the universe to have their God be a living God that could in fact relate to them and they could in fact inhabit it. Way early on when I started getting into the Jordan Peterson thing, the reason was I saw that what Peterson was helping with and then through Peterson I found Peugeot and I know a lot of you through Peterson you found me or through Peterson you found Peugeot and then me. The thing that Peterson was helping with is the divided world and this has been something that I've been thinking about for a very long time and I've been thinking about it because of the difficulty of these kinds of conversations and I've been convinced for a very long time that this is a philosophical linguistic dilemma that we're in as a result of this whole history. Now Jonathan Peugeot is worshiping with people who have not been tremendously subject to this history and as Jonathan says later in the video, those who have been educated, well educated, we like to use educated as some kind of a nebulous term. You're always educated into something. You are, and as C.S. Lewis, Tim Keller, many have said, when you convert it's not that you abandon beliefs, you just change beliefs and a lot of people like to imagine when they leave Christianity they're out into the blue sky, real world. It's just as much a constructed world as the world you are living in. It just has different constructs and different ideas. So what does it mean, how do you answer your Mormon parents about what you believe? We've been wrestling with this since the Reformation because how is Jesus Christ present in the Lord's Supper or Eucharist or as the Roman Catholics call it, the Host. John Calvin said he's spiritually present. Why did John Calvin say that? Because the underpinnings of these conversations were already happening and we were already figuring out the power we could have when we would walk through some of the stuff that, for example, For example, Verkeke was walking through when he talked about Aristotle. How is Jesus present at the Lord's Supper? The Protestant Reformation split the church over this. Now a lot of people will say, well, I don't have a problem, he's there spiritually. Wonderful. That works. What do you mean by it? Well, that's when they're going to start to stumble. So this Mormon young person is obviously wrestling with matters of faith. And I would say, well, Frodo, in a sense, goes to live with Tolkien. What do you mean Frodo goes to live with Tolkien? How could that happen? Well, you would need someone who has mastery over the physical world in a way that Tolkien does not. Tolkien is merely a sub creator. Tolkien is not the sub creator, is not the creator of this physical space. And that's where the word physical is really helpful here. Because if someone says literal, I'll say, do you mean physical? Oh, yeah. What do you mean by physical? That which is subject to, let's take a nod to Matt Dillahunty, the laws of physics. Okay, but what are the laws of physics? Well, they're patterns. They're patterns that express themselves in matter. Again, go watch that Aristotle video. They express themselves in matter. Then you have to ask, well, where do these patterns come from? They come from its author. So where is heaven? It's where the author lives. What do you mean lives? Do you mean he has a body? No. It's where the author lives. That's the only way we can, that is the best way that we can conceive of it. Again, go back to that Aristotle and we want the Gestalt of Bird. And if you haven't watched that video, you're going to have to watch that video probably to understand this. We have the Gestalt of Bird. And you say, well, explain that to me. Well, here, wait a second. I'll do it in one word. Bird. Well, that's unsatisfying. Yeah, but it's the best we can do. Because we are not gods over this Gestalt that we're living in. Suddenly, some of you are going to hear the simulation argument back there. Yeah, the simulation argument is kind of the cosmological argument. It's saying we're living in a world that has a creator. It's not base reality. What do you mean by base reality? Well, there's another metaphor. Well, no, base reality would be literal. Yeah, but it's all patterns all the way down. We don't get beyond the patterns. We can't because we're part of it. But we have tremendous power over things and we can conceptualize tremendous, tremendous, we can conceptualize things about this world that are really powerful. Yeah, we can. And that's really cool. But again, going back to that video, we can't make it. Someone might be able to describe a chair. They might take a ruler and a scale and they might probe it and find out the elements that are used in the making of that chair. Someone might do so. Well, let's use my little handy little cell phone stand. They might describe this. And well, we made it. Here's the thing. We can't make life. Well, why not? Even if we manage to make life by trying to reverse engineer the living things we saw now, we still wouldn't be masters of it. The way the master of life, this anti entropy envelope did for us. See, the problem is that we have biases. And when we start talking that way, if there is a master of life, might we owe this master of life something? And we don't like to be in debt. So, words that fudge literal, avoid it. And when I say avoid it, because you'll hear me use the word literal and you'll hear me use the word spiritual, what I mean by that is don't use these words without pausing and thinking and maybe trying to find a better word. Use physical, perhaps. Or use, someone asked me to identify the story verse. I, Paul VanderKlay, am as much a story as I am a body. And in fact, I would argue I'm much more easily a story than a body because now is the story dependent on the body? Well, is a marriage dependent on the body of the two participants? Is a marriage, does a marriage exist literally? Does a marriage exist physically? Does a marriage govern? Is a marriage real? When is a marriage real? When is a marriage most real? A marriage is most real when it's governing not just two individuals, but it's governing, in fact, marriages can govern entire nations. Why was Henry VIII so worried about his marriages or not worried? Why were those marriages so important? That idea, this thing, marriage was governing all of Europe. Is marriage real? Literally.