https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=cudKimiqr34

 Hi, this is Paul. This is my latest installment in my ongoing series, Words That Fudge, and this week's fudgy word is religion. Now, Jordan Peterson a while ago explained what he believed by religion, and this obviously came to be part of his ongoing conversation with Sam Harris and other atheists. So let's listen to this clip from Lafayette College. Thank you for being here. I really appreciate it. So I was watching a few of your interviews in preparation for this, and I heard you speak about religion quite a bit. And if you look up what religion means in the Webster dictionary, you get something like a system of faith centered on a supernatural being or beings or something like that. But I've heard you use religion to describe things like punk rockers, for example, that that's a religious experience. So my first question would be, how do you define what is considered religious? And then sort of as a follow-up to that, if say Sam Harris... Religious is what you act out. What's that? Religious is what you act out. Anything you act out. Everything you act out is predicated on your implicit axioms, and the system of implicit axioms that you hold as primary as your religious belief system. It doesn't matter whether you're an atheist or not. That's just surface. That's just surface noise. So it has nothing to do with divinity or supernatural beings? No, I didn't say that. Or it doesn't necessarily have to do with those? No, it probably necessarily has to do with it too, but it doesn't necessarily have anything to do with your voluntarily articulated statements about whether or not you believe in something like a transcendent deity. So I mean, what you act out is much more what you are than what you say about yourself. And what the hell do you know about what you believe anyways? You're complicated, man. It's a fair question. Well, seriously, people are complicated. You know, like we're... we don't... we're not transparent to ourselves at all. That's why we have to go to university and study psychology. It's like, you know, we're not exactly black boxes, but we are the most complicated things there are. Right? And we can't even program our VCR clocks. So it's like how the hell can we propose to understand ourselves? And you know, I'm existentially oriented, which is to say that I think that what you hold to be true is best determined as a consequence of an analysis of your actions rather than as a consequence of an analysis of what you purport to believe. Now in order to act, you can't act without a hierarchy of value, which I tortured the other poor questioner about. You can't act without a hierarchy of values because you can't act unless you think one thing is better than another. Because why would you act otherwise? So that means that you're embedded within a hierarchy of values. Whether you know it or not, or maybe multiple fragmentary and competing hierarchies of value, which is all the worse for you, by the way, because it just makes you very confused. That hierarchy of values has an axiomatic... it's based on axioms, and the probability that you understand them is very low, because generally people don't understand their axioms. But that axiomatic system is essentially your religious system. And there's no way out of that, as far as I can tell. And you can say, well, it isn't predicated on conscious belief in a transcendent deity. It's like, okay, have it your way. But, you know, most people in this room act out a Judeo-Christian ethic. And not only do they act it out, if they're treated in a manner that's not commensurate with that ethic, they get very, very, very annoyed. So for example, if I fail to treat you as if you're an embodiment of a divine fragment, let's say, that's characterized by the ability to make free choice, and to determine your own destiny, in some sense, or if I fail to treat you as if you're a valued contributing member of the polity as a sovereign individual, then you'll find that very offensive and become angry. It's like, okay, then that's what you believe. Well, if I ask you if you believe any of that, well, that's a whole different story. You might give me some radical leftist nonsense, but that doesn't take away from the fundamentals of your action. As one final thing, so when you and, say, Sam Harris argue about religion, you're arguing about fundamentally different things, it sounds like. His conception of what is religious is very different from yours. Yeah, well, he tends to think of religious thought the same way that a smart 13-year-old atheist thinks about a fundamentalist Christian. It's like, yeah, okay, you're just not getting to the heart of the matter. You know, and I just finished reading all of Sam's books in the last couple of weeks, and as far as I'm concerned, he doesn't ever get to the bottom of the issue. He doesn't address the fundamental thinkers. There are some profound thinkers. Dostoevsky's one, Tolstoy, Nietzsche, Jung. It's like they're completely absent from, and the same with Dawkins. It's completely absent. All that conceptualization is completely absent from their corpus of works. They don't even have an understanding for the psychological utility of religion, and it's a big problem. You know, you don't get to be an atheist when the people you attack are naive fundamentalists. And I have some sympathy for the naive fundamentalists. It's like what they're basically saying is something like this. Look, we have an ethos that's valuable. You scientist types are casually dismantling it. What the hell are we supposed to do? Well, the fundamentalists don't know what to do about that. So they say, well, creationism is science. It's like, well, no, it's not. But that doesn't mean that they don't have a point. Their point is there's something valuable here. It's like don't break it casually. What are you going to replace it with? The new atheists wish that everybody becomes rational. It's like, yeah, sure, that's going to happen. Thank you. So right there, fudgy already. As the young man did, I'll just take the Google scrape here. Definition of religion in English. Now in a belief and worship in a supernatural controlling power, especially a personal god or gods. This was exactly the definition that Peterson was pushing back on. Peterson said, you know, your axiomatic positions underneath even below your conscious level, these are your acting out religion. And when I heard him say this, I thought, yeah, he and I are on the same page because that's pretty much what I assume someone's religion is. But the actual usage of the English word is the atheists have a fair pushback. So there's two sub definitions here. A particular system of faith and worship. Yeah. A pursuit or interest in which someone ascribes something of supreme importance. And this gets into what Christians often talk about as idolatry. Now if we look at the etymology of the word in English, it comes from the old French, which goes back to the Latin, religare, which means to bind. religio, obligation, bond, reverence. Middle English originally in the sense of life under monastic vows from the old French or from Latin religio. Obligation, bond, reverence, perhaps based in Latin religare to bind the under monastic vows of middle English. So religion in English, okay, and the English comes from the Latin and the middle English. Has this idea of being bound. You're bound to something and bound to vows bound to a vocation, bound to a community, bound to a discipline. So right away the question of the relationship between the word religion and let's say supernatural, again, as I've said in many videos when you use that word supernatural, you're evoking an entire an entire history of philosophical assumptions. Now one of the interesting questions is well, how about religion in the Bible? Well, actually the word religion is hardly found in the Bible. You'll find it in some English translations, but usually only a few times and there's three major passages in the New Testament where they're translating the Greek threschia, which is really a word that has much more to do with rites and rituals and these types of things. So the first passage from Colossians 2. Therefore do not let anyone judge you by what you eat or drink or by regard to a religious festival, a new moon celebration or a Sabbath day. And now you're going to get a sense of Paul's idea of sacraments. These are a shadow of the things that were to come. In other words, there's a more solid thing that's casting a shadow into this world. The light via this solid thing is casting a shadow into this world because there's always three elements that go into shadow making. There's the light source, there's the solid thing, and then there's the shadow that the solid thing casts against the background. There's a shadow of the things that are to come. The reality, however, is found in Christ. And so in other words, Paul says that these rituals, these rites are a shadow of the things that were to come and in a sense a pre-shadow. Kind of sometimes when I talk about eschatology, as I'll talk a little bit later, there's a pre- actually I'm thinking about my sermon, a pre-echo. Do not let anyone delight in false humility and the worship of angels disqualified you. Now that worship, they don't use religion there. It could very well, you could translate it to religion of angels because the same word in the next two passages will be translated as religion. Now there's a lot of debate about whether they're worshipping angels in terms of the angels being the focus of the religion. Actually, my New Testament professor at Calvin Seminary had written a academic paper on this text suggesting that actually the worship that angels do might have been a cult that some Jews in the Hellenistic world were potentially participating in. So do not let anyone delight in the false false humility and the worship of angels or the religion of angels. Actually, if you used religion, it would at least point the passage more towards Andy Bantstra's assumption. Such a person also goes into a great deal about what they have seen. They are puffed up with idle notions by their unspiritual mind and so things that they've seen. Religious, that's religious experience. I had, I was talking yesterday to to skip, to skip Connor who is, Connor, oh, I'll put David's name right, who is, who is, who has a Jungian reading group on the internet. He'd been making some videos talking about myself and Jordan Peterson. And so we're having some more direct conversation about some of those things, but you'll notice that Paul, that the New Testament has a very complex understanding, which I think is rightfully so, of religious experience. It isn't to diminish it or downplay it, but it also doesn't just embrace it unquestioningly. So Colossians 2, the worship of angels, the religion of angels, the worship that angels do of God or the types of worship. Now some of these things come through clearer here in the Acts 26. Paul is talking about his background. The Jewish people all know the way I have lived since I was a child from the beginning of my life in my own country and also here in Jerusalem. They know me for a long time and they can testify if they are willing that I conform to the strictest sect of our religion. And this is a more common use of the word religion. It describes a a particular community that has particular practices and beliefs, and that's a very fair use of the word religion. Living as a Pharisee. And then James 1. This is very interesting because this gets into a much more sacramental view of it, similar to what's implied in the Colossians 2 text. Those who consider themselves religious and yet do not keep a tight rein on their tongues, deceive themselves and their religion is worthless. Religion that God our father accepts as pure and faultless is this. To look after orphans and widows in their distress and to keep oneself from being polluted by the world. Now right here you see the fudginess of this word religion because religion can be seen as meaning a set a community that is defined or created or set about by groups of beliefs overt confessional beliefs or practices. Those are religious communities, but as James says, well true religion is actually well then doing some of these things which are direct caring for widows and orphans, let's say. Acts of kindness. And so what James does is he connects these rites and rituals with the rest of life and says that these things actually should be one seamless thing. And in a sense James is getting more into that Petersonian definition of religion. And so James would say that acting out your beliefs gets expressed both in these rituals that one participates in these overt beliefs that one expresses and then these other actions which aren't necessarily easily or directly tied to those particular what we would call religious beliefs, but they themselves are an expression of those beliefs. So you might say well because Jesus told me I need to love my enemies, then I will be kind and do acts of kindness for my enemies. Jesus says don't let your right hand know what your left hand is doing. So I'm going to do this for people, but I'm going to do it in a way that doesn't draw attention to myself. Now I had a conversation with Ron Dart yesterday or a couple of days ago, which will be coming out probably next week or the week after. Definitely the week after. I'll be at when I'm on vacation. I'll be I try not to keep the language the channel totally empty, but I've started reading this book that that Ron Dart talked about about Erasmus and Luther. Of course Ron Dart's very excited about Erasmus being an Erasmus scholar, but this book about Erasmus and Luther and the the fight for the western mind and right away in the first paragraph of the book I was interested. Towards the end of the year 1516, Erasmus of Rotterdam, then living in the low countries, received a letter from George Spallatin, and if you know any Luther history Spallatin, bing bing bing. The secretary to Frederick the Wise of Saxony. After expressing his esteem for the dust humanist, Spallatin explained that he was writing on behalf of an Augustinian priest, that was Martin Luther, whom he didn't name. The priest had read Erasmus's recent publication. Erasmus was the first in in some ways Erasmus was the first popular author, the first man to become wealthy by selling books after the development of the printing press. Michael Messing goes on to say that afterwards. He had read Erasmus's recently published annotation of the New Testament, notes on the Latin translation known as the Vulgate, and had two concerns, one related to original sin. Erasmus, the priest believed, had misunderstood Paul's position on this doctrine and had urged him to read Augustin's commentary on it, which he felt would set him right. He also objected to Erasmus's understanding of works. Now when I read this, this completely caught my attention because of I'm really trying to figure out what happened in the Protestant Reformation with respect to sacraments and sacramentalism. So what are works? Now James had just said works are the feeding of widows and orphans. Is that what you mean by works or are works religious rights? Erasmus seemed to feel that Paul, in rejecting the performance of works, was referring to only only to rights and ceremonies, when in fact he meant all kinds of works including keeping the Ten Commandments. And so in other words, what is the relationship between these religious things, which we would think about as going to church, listening to a sermon, participating in the Lord's Supper, being baptized, participating in the liturgy, all of these things, these rights and ceremonies that secular people look at as religious, and then these other things which secular people don't look at as religious. Let's say helping your neighbor out if they have a flat tire or if their house was flooded or if they're hungry or helping a homeless man. You see with our current conception of religious and especially the definition of the secular of the celebrity atheists, one side says well it's clear that going to church and taking the Eucharist and being baptized and participating in the liturgy and praying and reading the Bible, those are religious, but helping your neighbor out if he's in trouble or helping widows and orphans, that is not religious, that is secular. And if you've been following my channel, you know one of the things that I'm really working on is what is this question between the religious and the non-religious? And of course, Peterson jumps right in and says anything that's tied to your... What religion is are these axioms beneath the surface that manifest themselves out in action, and in that sense Jordan Peterson and the author of the book of James seemed to be on the same page. Now in talking to to Skip yesterday, one of the things that caught my attention when I talked to him was he gave me Carl Young's definition of religion, which I found fascinating because I was already working on this video. What are religions? says Young. Religions are psychotherapeutic systems. Oh, that's interesting. It's also terribly modern and contemporary because we very quickly associate the religious with the therapeutic, and that's something that we're gonna have to talk a lot more about. What are we doing? We psychotherapists. We are trying to heal the suffering of the human mind, of the human psyche, which itself is a very fraught word, or of the human soul. And the religions deal with the same problem. So Peterson and Young are not that far from each other. Therefore our Lord himself is a healer. He is a doctor. He heals the sick and he deals with the troubles of the soul, and that is exactly what we call psychotherapy. Now again, there's tons of stuff in there to unpack, which I'm not going to take the time to work on now, but it all gets into this question of the relationship between these axioms that are in our hearts and our manifest behavior and these things that we label as religious. Now Young is gonna broaden it here and says, well that which relieves suffering. And so in Young's definition, well, helping out, taking care of widows and orphans, helping out the homeless, that would be religious, but he also says well psychotherapy. So those who are suffering from basically mental distress, and see what's interesting about us is that throughout much of human history physical distress was so utterly common. It's like we never got around to the fact that we were mentally stressed. It's like we never got around to dealing with mental distress until we had full stomachs and good locks on the doors. And now that we have full stomachs and good locks on the doors, now suddenly we're just feeling mental distress. And again, that isn't to say that ancient people or troubled people don't have mental distress. They do, but it's just interesting the way these things work. And so then obviously in the 20th and 21st century you get to focus on the therapeutic. And so Young places religions in the area of the therapeutic in that quote. Now just I saw on Tim Keller's channel this little video from Heidegger, which is well, I keep forgetting I have an audio only podcast that is a translation of this. And this is in a different language. So I'll just read the subtitles and hopefully it won't disrupt you if you're actually listening to it in its original language because when I listen to Spanish and someone's talking underneath it like on the news, I always find that annoying. But here we go. On religion, Heidegger. Okay, let's try that again. On religion. I would say that men For example, communists Have a religion when they believe in science, that's interesting They believe absolutely in modern science, he would say they have faith And this is absolutely faith That is the trust in the certainty of the results of science Is a faith and is in certain sense something that emanates from people And is therefore a religion And I would say no one is without religion And every person in a certain way transcends themselves That is they are displaced And Now I also saw in Adam Frenditz, Adam's twitter this week Actually today, I guess it was Since there's no evidence, is it illogical to believe in life on other planets? And when Adam tweeted that I thought that's a terrific question because it evokes the question of religion and faith Because you have the question do you believe in that that aliens have visited earth is there evidence and A lot of people would say well, I don't believe in any of those ufo sightings But I believe that there is life on other planets Well, we don't have any physical evidence that there's life on other planets But many people believe it why do they believe it because they think it's probable because there's life on this planet and and what that shows is basically what they do is that they sort of Have their position here and they extend outwards in terms of their imagination and say well, I believe there is and so there you have faith Is that a sort of religion? That was a great question by adam and great use of twitter now In my own tradition in the reform tradition, which is part of christianity We always had this saying all of life is religious and essentially what we're saying is agreeing with jordan peterson's initial comment that What we do in all of our life is we work out our religion and not not necessarily the religion that we say we believe But the religion that is in our hearts and in past videos i've heard i've played tim keller basically making the same assertion Now the rites and ceremonies are intended to be sacramental to the rest of one's life in other words, there's supposed to be an expression that the A wholeness between the rites and ceremonies and what we do in the rest of our lives now There's almost always a disjunction between them. We fail in living them out. We fail in bearing witness to them, but You know essentially and I was working on the book of ezekiel in my adult sunday school class What is true or wrong in the temple is manifest in the streets? That was part of what the the point ezekiel was making when he had these visions of the temple and these goings on in the temple What's true in the temple will get manifest in the street and it's connected with what's jordan peterson says You know, what's your axioms in the heart or what get manifest out into the rest of your life? and you know at some point if I ever have a longish conversation with jordan peterson, this is probably what i'm going to talk about because The idea of well, why do christians go to church? Why do christians participate in these rites and rituals in what are what's technically called cultic activities? Um worship prayer all of reading the bible devotions all of this is is in order an attempt to to actually Work out and express A far longer tradition. It's very aspirational actually a far longer tradition in the nuts and bolts of our lives and as I say christians always Always fail at doing this but this is this is what we're always working on And faith is how you live in that way in a world of uncertainty Do I know whether or not there are? Aliens aliens have visited the earth. There's a lot of people who say they have evidence. Do we have definite evidence yet? Many people say I believe that there are life on other planets. Well there you have the question in in fact a A very conservative member of my church came in with a science magazine recently and Showed all of these planets that they are discovering and and said to me and this really surprised me when he said it He said makes me think that there are people in these other worlds and I thought Wow, i'm really kind of surprised hearing that come out of his mouth But this is in a sense how faith works it radiates outward And then you have the question of well, will I live in conjunction with that faith? And again, if you go back to the jordan peterson David nasser one more question. This is this is the point that nasser was making So what I usually do when I talk to people or when I listen to people is I try to figure out what their real Religion is now. What do I mean by that and similar to jordan peterson? Well people will talk but The talk is helpful But it's in some ways not that helpful so then i'll ask people often what they do so and so and so do you do this? Well, why or why not because the doing gives you an idea Of what's really going on inside their heart which may be disconnected from what's going on in terms of their language And and so even when i'm just listening to people talking i'm always trying to figure out what is their real religion And that comes down to a few questions. Usually I get them talking and if you watch my Conversation videos you probably begin to see a pattern that I get them talking and I do a lot of listening Ask them open-ended questions and see what they're doing Open-ended questions and see where they go with it One of the interesting things is that the most common question jesus gets asked is or the most common question Jesus asks people are what do you want? Because wanting is a big deal Augustine we are wanting creatures. We are we are We are defined by our desires and in fact our lives are hierarchically ordered desires Jordan peterson the world is a form for action and within this form for action we exhibit what we want And what we want gets played out in terms of the priorities that we have in directing our lives Augustine and everything in the augustinian tradition is all about ordered loves. What do we love most? then there's Little someone at the door hang out And and I wouldn't separate, you know the story verse from the bio verse here either because a biologist you read you watch Look at biologists. What are they looking at? Well, what do these animals want animals want to eat animals want dominance animals? Animals want to procreate so on and so forth. In fact wanting desiring is what is what makes the world go around So where to start? Well, I usually start with two questions. What is your problem? And what is your solution or you can object that you can pull it back a little bit What do you think is the root of the problem in the world? What do you think is the ultimate solution to the world's problems? If any can be found And again, you see this with peterson. What is your what is your problem problem stack up with hierarchies and time and context We see opportunities and threats our existential problem is discerned By the hierarchy You have suffering loss decay and in an actual age framework you have the bottom story Which is what is our problem? That's on the bottom. Then what is the solution? That's on the top heaven earth Eternity decay And in as I mentioned in my last video about the the peter begosian podcast secular people they don't have the two stories now Someone that somebody made a comment about two stories in terms of a two-story house. I do mean it that way It's also kind of two stories because there are two types of stories that are running So in the axial age you have heaven and earth and the bible the story of the bible is a reconciliation of the story of heaven and earth In secularism you have now and the future and so again if you listen to secular people Well, we suffer from cancer now, but we will cure cancer in the future and this is called progress We suffer from war now, but we will resolve war in the future. We suffer from Environmental degradation now, but we will resolve our environmental problems in the future maybe or maybe not and and so what you what I do with this is I begin to look at the What I see as the religion of the person. What do they think the problem is now? Well, the problem is self-centeredness or the problem is greed or individuals are you know, russian individuals are pure But institutions are evil and you know on and on and on and so I ask questions to try and discern What is the problem? What is the solution? So what are the solutions and you can look at Verveki's affordance conversation there and there's a there's a connection between us and what we're grasping at Your salience landscape is shaped by the solutions you imagine or at least to begin to try out You're looking for relief from suffering or relief from loss or relief from decay again This is the top story in an axial framework. This is heaven the solution is so then if if you look at some groups of christians The solution is going to heaven when you die or the happy hunting ground or you know Whatever second story axial framework you have getting up to the good place In again in a secular where you only have one level the future, you know The good is hopefully the future although the future isn't secure and that's where you begin to tease out Aspects of their religion. Well things are bad now Hopefully in the future they'll be good But as with many secular stories the future could be bad and so then you have the peck of pessimism get expressed in in zombie movies and so on and so forth Now now this This is a conversation that peterson participated in a little while ago philosophy and the human soul And I just remembered this as the objectivist the ein rand institute conversation And I had forgotten that that was in fact the title of it and and what's interesting as as actually dave rubin points out Coming into this conversation. You've got the human soul right there, but Right there but Already you're going to have difficulty of definition in terms of if anybody believes that human beings do have a soul I think in some ways Let's shift a little bit because I know we can this was one of the this was one of the better conversations and this really set Up. Let's see the date of this was Was july 9. So this was really setting up the jordan peterson sam harris conversations So let's uh, let's let this play talk about inequality and the individual and all that we can we can do that all night long But the the title of this talk is philosophy and the human soul So we only talked for literally about 20 seconds the four of us before You know, we didn't plan anything about what we were going to do here Um, so I thought the the best way to start that would be how would you even define the soul? Your on i'll start with you Really? Yeah You got a psychologist a philosopher and a finance guy But this is yeah And you know the rumor is that finance guys have no say I mean I was actually going to start with jordan, but you looked down for a second which was the cue that I should go right here Yeah, I mean I don't have I don't have a succinctly definition of it but it has to do with With consciousness and values it has to do Now again And as I get later in this different world views and I talked again about Paul maxwell's lovely little 30 minute introduction to the whole history of of philosophy and western civilization you have metaphysics you have Epistemology and you have axiology down here with metaphysics Your the limitations built into your metaphysics into your metaphysical system that you both assume Presume and assert whether or not all those three are actually in alignment with each other Those limitations will limit what you're able to build in terms of your epistemology and your axiology All right So so here suddenly when you have this word soul this word soul is problematic In a materialist or a physicalist framework, what do you mean by soul? And I think actually if you understand it as story Well, okay if you're again if you listen to verveckis, you know throw away materialism to at least talk about physicalism and at least include Information and again, I heard that from daniel denett and I think an unbelievable podcast and when he said well There's matter plus information. I thought Oh now we're cheating here boys now. We're now we're adding information now You're what exactly is this information and now we're letting in all kinds of stuff because information is not Is not physical and if we're if we're saying that information is not simply A human thing that we put on top or project on to the physical layer But is itself a function of it? Well now we have a far You have far more so if you're a physicalist you have far more to deal with but you're also open I think you're liable to a lot more a lot of other questions about well Where does this information come from because generally speaking information is a function of mind And so right away they're noticing that If if you're if your metaphysic doesn't include mind Mind You're going to get into trouble and and so now when we hear them talking about a soul Well, suddenly consciousness is in the room and you're gonna have to include consciousness but you're including consciousness as one of the elements you start with and that is problematic if you imagine that mind is simply a function of A material brain if you're including consciousness from the beginning I saw a very interesting Well, I should pull it up. Hang on So my friend stron sent me this And again one of these days I get strun on my channel. I really want to get him on my channel, but um Something or nothing he sends me and it's a it's a question something or nothing and rupert shell drakes on this And i'll see if I can find the clip Now this whole video is worth watching but i'm just going to play a little bit of it. Okay. Thank you Well when I was thinking about this discussion I read laurence krauss's book something from nothing because that's the most popular visual version of this debate from the cosmological point of view at the moment And what struck me about it and what struck me about most arguments is how conservative they are If you look at traditional discussions of why there's something rather than nothing The traditional ones are theological discussions They start from the assumption that there's a source of all things which is threefold in kashmiri Shaivism, it's called para shiva the unified source of all things With shiva which represents the principle of form or order and shakti which represents the principle of energy or power In the christian version of the holy trinity you have god the ground of all being you have the logos which is The mind of god the form the source of all forms and you have the spirit which is the source of energy movement and power Well in laurence krauss You have a source Which he doesn't discuss but it has two manifestations one the laws of nature Which may be the field of all possible laws of nature that may apply to all universes But that's taken for granted as pre-existing and then you have the quantum vacuum which is the source of all potential Energy and power for this and all other universes In other words, it's exactly like shakti and his role of the laws of nature is exactly like shiva Or the logos and the spirit Um, so the the This seemingly radical atheistic view is extraordinarily conservative in philosophical and theological terms It just rephrases them and with a few kind of polemical jabs against sort of old-fashioned theologians He's basically restated the ancient case for the existence of god He goes even further he says in that the It's the nature of the quantum vacuum is so unstable that it almost inevitably would give rise to a universe through a kind of fluctuation So, okay, let's look at genesis chapter one verse one The earth was without form the world without form and void and the spirit of god moved on the face of the deep Or the face of the waters Well the quantum vacuum is pretty well a modern version of the face of the deep And if the spirit of god the wind moves on the face of the deep it creates waves and the waves presumably follow a law-like structure So what struck me about all this? Was that the debate is essentially a theological debate that's been reframed in these modern physical terms And the really interesting question for me about it is that in the theological debate the ground of all this is conscious Whereas for Lawrence Krauss a materialist and atheist the ground of all this is unconscious now It's a matter of faith either way I suppose But as far as I can see the advantage of the ultimate ground of being being conscious has first of all You don't your there's a basis for these Rational laws instead of the laws of nature being free-floating mathematical abstractions that are outside space and time That apply to all possible universes that are ultimately Metaphysical in the ultimate sense of metaphysics as being beyond physics um That um, they they you got free-floating laws which have no ontological basis whatever um, and then you have human minds that appear mysteriously in an unconscious universe and can actually Understand these laws although we've evolved by evolutionary psychology of sort of using stone tools and primitive campfire type techniques Our minds are somehow able to comprehend The entire universe so that there can be someone like Krauss putting forward theories about the ultimate nature of reality Well, if there's a conscious basis for both reality and for human minds the traditional view this makes a lot more sense um take that away and we're left with a kind of unconscious version of traditional theology and a lack of explanation for the existence of minds of any kind including those of physicists Which in philosophy of mind is called the hard problem And then of course they'll have adam but It's a great little teaser and you can watch you can watch the whole thing I'll put the link in the put the link in the in the comments. So let's get let's get back to this this these uh, uh, this again when when when vrveki Moved from And said well materialism no physicalism. I thought ah now we're really gonna have an interesting conversation because Once you have information. Well, where does this information come from? Well this this information these these laws of physics have always been here. Oh, you mean they're eternal Uh Do they do they do they come from matter or or does matter Work out in so many patterns. Well, we have infinite number of universes and so then we just we're just in the one that works And there's all these other universes where things don't work and bodies don't work or there's not even enough works to make bodies or minds Or so on and so forth. So so again, it's it's just getting very interesting Okay So then back to the soul well what on earth is the soul if we're going to talk about that? With our conscious experiences some of our conscious experiences Uh are being and and the values that we have as individuals the things that are most important to us and that I think experience Is what I would refer as our soul or our spirit Now the difficulty you always have with with consciousnesses is if we're having Consciousness in a moment or ongoing consciousness consciousness throughout time and then the question is well What what can actually link consciousness throughout time? Well very quickly It's this autobiographical narrative that we construct which if you again watch the verveky video I played in the last video Well, this is this is something that we we we develop and we grow and learn how to employ but this then becomes our Our reality this then becomes the reality in which we live it becomes the story in which we live and so You know, this is where we get the question of well, what are we? Well, we are stories you Know I think these are somewhat interchangeable when I talk about spiritual Experiences it's just it's an experience of consciousness. It's a you know If you listen to a piece of music and and the the combination of emotion values and and your conscious Listening and and absorbing that to me is what spirit soul would mean See see and his his idea of spirit. I mean because generally speaking spirit is that which moves? All right, so you see the trees moving well spirit wind that's what's moving the trees Soul can't be both the thing that's being moved by spirit and spirit itself so again there He's really got a problem with he just he just doesn't have enough pieces to work with here And so when asked a pretty fundamental question. Well, what is soul? You're easier saying there is no such thing as the soul which is often a quite an answer that you'll get from Non-theists There is no such thing as a soul. Oh, so what is this consciousness and and we still use the word we still talk about the word we can't give up the word because So this this hole in our language hole in our conversation would be way too awkward And so we're going to keep using this word But we have to try and figure out how we can use this word in this context Without having its absence be too noticeable Greg yeah, I would say um Speaking of the philosopher and first as a random scholar. So so so the philosopher the the the finance guy struggles So now the philosopher is going to take a whack at it She had the the phrase that man is a being of self-made soul So the idea here is your soul and as a being of self-made soul It's true in a sense, but We have problems with god being self-made And a lot bigger problems with us being self-made is your consciousness Um as the faculty your ability to know and to think your soul is your Ability to think and to know that's your soul uh, but also You have to build who you are build your character build your personality So soul is who you are and again, that's quite a bit closer to the regular definition of what a soul is Build your values come to value things set your life around them by doing that over time and pursuing them you develop So again consciousness over time the story that you're constructing Up a character you develop into a certain type of person you develop into a distinct individual There's a beautiful line in the in the fountain head, um, which this is the theme of this conference Uh, someone talks about how most people long for uh immortality But when you meet them the next time they weren't the same as they were the last they're mutable They're constantly changing what they're after is constantly changing But the hero of the novel his friend says you could imagine him existing forever He's achieved immortality in his you know day-to-day life Because there's a constancy to him and that kind of constancy that having a soul Having an eye being a particular person. It's an achievement. It's the achievement of having formed values Having formed something you want that of your life and then having built for yourself through Living this way a character that's adapted to that a character that's focused on that you know this reminds me of uh groundhog day in a way because In the q a's that we've been doing for the last couple months a couple times. It's come up What's your favorite comedy and you've mentioned groundhog day where he has to bill Murray has to consistently come back and do it better And do it better and do it better and do it better Well, what exactly is that thing that you're improving? Now i've set you up and what exactly how do you navigate and evaluate? And guide what are the stars by which you use to guide the development of that? And how do we know that the thing is actually developing in a coherent way that can become something that you might Dare to use the word eternal to refer to What is your definition? Well of the soul Well, I was thinking that the words the hand that writes and then moves on came into my mind and then I was thinking well This is the way I conceptualize how consciousness works. And so maybe this is in some sense the locale of the soul. So I don't believe that we're driven Deterministically like obviously we are to some degree, but I don't think that that's the right way of conceptualizing how human consciousness works I think it's putting the cart before the horse in some sense So the way it looks to me is that what we have a raid in front of us is a landscape of possibility And I think that that's phenomenologically Uh accurate, you know when you wake up in the morning Especially when you wake up at three in the morning and you're you're concerned about how your life is going You see an array of possible futures manifest themselves in front of you And you know, there are more possible futures, of course than you can imagine But there's plenty that make themselves manifest. I could do this. I could do that. This could happen. What about this? Maybe I should do this and it's like there's a branching landscape in front of you And some of the places that you're headed to are more likely than others and some of them take a lot more effort to attain Than others, but it's a distribution of possible landscapes and that's actually your reality It's not like you're driven By the present you see a branching landscape of possibility in front of you and I think of that as potential and we all Know about potential because we upgrade ourselves and each other for not living up to our potential Which is a very interesting thing that we do because potential isn't something concrete and in fact It's the opposite of concrete and yet we act as if it's the most real thing You should live up to your potential, you know, and your conscience will bother you if you don't live up to your potential So you have a potential and there's a potential that manifests itself and then what you seem to do Is that you make choices between those? Alternative realities and you do that in part by imposing a value structure on them and and and Deriving a pathway as a consequence of that But you decide which of those potentials are going to manifest themselves in actuality And so you are the hand that writes that and then moves on and this is a very deep idea I mean i've traced it back to to I think our most profound religious intuitions The idea that that it was the word of god for example that gave rise to habitable order out of chaos at the beginning Of time I think is a reflection of the same idea I think the soul is the thing that mediates between potential and actuality and I mean that literally and metaphorically at the same time That's what you're doing is you're confronting potential which is that which could be And you're deciding Which of that is going to be? And the thing that's doing that is the soul and that's its divine task and I think now divine Okay, what do you mean by that word? And I think what in a petersonian content that which is at the top of the hierarchy That is the ultimate task. That is the most important task and that is the task of tasks I think the fact that you do that is actually why it's necessary for societies to grant you the idea of intrinsic right? Sorry, no That's why it's necessary for functional societies to be predicated on the idea that you have intrinsic value Is because you actually are the locale where potential transforms itself into actuality And so we determine the actual the action of our soul determines the actuality of the world I think that's genuinely the case So this is really interesting to me because i'm watching you guys and I can see a lot of agreement But obviously jordan made at least two references to god and religion there now, obviously This is where an objectivist and jordan would have a point of disagreement This is why you're doing these public events with sam harris and one of the things that i've been thinking about it as we've been on Tour is at the end of the day if we all ultimately agree and if everyone in this room if we could ultimately agree on a morality and and The definition of the soul that all made sense and jordan's perhaps was had a more religious connotation and yours didn't And we all could live functioning good lives within that then does it really matter beyond the the interest in the intellectual? Discussion because there was a lot of agreement. I could see it in your body language in both of you guys greg. I'll start with you Well, let me start with some of the things I agree with a lot and Including some of the use of religious language I think there's a good reason for even for those of us who aren't religious or don't think of ourselves as And I think I think of myself as an atheist. I am an atheist but um, though I know you interpret that word differently um, but he'll tell you if you're an atheist we'll get into an argument about this later, but um So first of all, I think what we've seen what you're describing about the many Manifold potentials and the soul actualizes it is a conviction which I very much agree with and I think we can know is true And I think I agree we presuppose in all of our thinking and all of our judging of people Which is that we have free will that there's not a future that's written and we're just on a path traveling down it But rather in every moment we're able to make choices and our choices change the future And that is a really profound fact It's a profound fact about our consciousness. It's connected to Everything else that's of value about us and I agree if that wasn't true of us We'd be a very different kind of creature We wouldn't interact with each other in the same way and we wouldn't need the same kind of political structure and it's it's Such a profound fact about us that we don't really have language for it or very good language for it. Um Religion what's interesting is that we don't really have very good language for it Well, he just he just said well the language we have for it is religious and he's an atheist So it's like well, we've been trying to leave that language behind and we haven't come up with a replacement. Well, why? Well, maybe because the language you're trying to leave behind Is in fact the language as peterson has made a point over that has been developed over very long periods of time and is already the best Tool you have but you want to avoid it. Why? In has been the form in which people have thought about the most profound facts about their most profound experience I mean language for fact about us that we don't really have language for it or very good language for it. Um Religion has been the form in which people have thought about the most profound facts about their most profound experiences About their understandings of them from well from as long as there's been people or as long as there's been Anyway for a very very long time. Um, and the the as we've lost religion Um, we haven't That's so alarmingly passive It's it's it's the the the bucket and pail I left on the beach as we lost religion We haven't been losing it. We've been throwing it away Found ways of luck. Um, and the the As we've lost religion um, we haven't found ways or haven't always found ways to Conceptualize independently of religion. Um those kind of profound values That's because fairy tales are hard to write The profound role of freedom in human life the um, what our highest potential is and so if you're going to talk All right there this whole scheme of the video you just laid it out right there all of this stuff That's our religion and and apart from religious language. We haven't found Language to conceptualize and so this is why well, how do I why do I pay attention? What do I listen for? Why do I try to figure out even with unreligious people what their religion is because we all we all have the need for these aspects of conception now Certain groups of people are trying to frame it without religious language, but they're clearly struggling Because they're avoiding this entire thing and not wanting to participate in it and rupert sheldrake's observation that well They're they're really just saying in many ways. They're sort of saying what various religious traditions have said They're just avoiding religious language and it's like Okay Why are you doing that? Why why not just you know? Why not untie the arm you've tied behind your back and participate in the conversation talk about um those kind of profound values the profound role of freedom in human life the What our highest potential is and so if you're going to talk about those things It's very hard to do it without really uh reaching for uh At least religious metaphor That's a really crucial issue, you know, I think I think it's a fundamentally crucial issue But I want to say though because just to finish the disagreeing part. Yeah What's true, but what's true matters, right? And something can be a beautiful metaphor, but if understood literally is false Now we're getting into the the brett weinstein sam harris jordan peterson conversation about metaphorical truth and alistair mcgrath Just to put in an unplayed unpaid plug for unbelievable With alistair mcgrath talking to brett weinstein. I am really looking forward to that conversation I really hope alistair mcgrath does his homework. He's a brilliant scientist and theologian and One of the things I think we need to do to uh lead our lives well to Achieve these kinds of values is to really value our minds and value our reason and value getting at the truth So now again if you go back to the video I played last time about truth and taking verveckis thing There's these there's this family of truth in in a sense where you have propositional truth You have perspectival truth you have power you have you know, these these four things that I laid out all of this What what we've tended to do is well It's we limit it to propositional truth and then we realize how in trouble we are because we don't have room for For minds or anything else in the universe the universe is just this blank space of objects Nothing else and it it simply doesn't work and it's part of the reason we're coming to the end of it If it turns out that to lead our lives well to Achieve these kinds of values is to really value our minds and value our reason and value getting at the truth So if it's funny we have to value our minds, but we're skeptical about what mind is It turns out that something's false um, then believing that it's true is not going to make our lives better and um So I don't think it could turn out that We're going to have a very deep disagreement about what's true about the basic facts of reality And yet we're all going to be again the basic facts. That's he's framing it once again in terms of propositional truth On every degree and um So I don't think it could turn out that we're going to have a very deep disagreement about what's true about the basic facts of reality And yet we're all going to be hunky-dory on everything else. I think those disagreements will make a difference but we have to acknowledge the Role of consciousness and freedom in life and I think there is an agreement between us on that And well, well the what i've observed is for example in my clinical practice when when i'm talking about Life and death moral issues and these are in situations where extreme things are happening in families and in individuals lives Talking about events that might have produced post-traumatic stress disorder or that set people up for murder at times or suicide like And when he says set people up for murder meaning set people up to They're so out of they're so they're they're designed they're they're ready to kill someone else and maybe they have Or character or that set people up for murder at times or suicide like Or terrible suffering some of which is induced voluntarily The probability that I can have a discussion with my clients about that at a level that will be salutary without using religious slash metaphorical language is zero I can't if I can't If the discussion can't take place in the domain of good versus evil something like that And this is especially true. I would say for post-traumatic stress disorder. You just don't get anywhere with it and I've been thinking about the the the the narrative issue a lot constantly and I think that Now the narrative issue will come obviously become front center at the jordan peterson san harris talks. So now the question of why And and sam harris keeps finding narrative as this disturbing You know narratives are just the illustrations that punctuate the propositional factual conversation Which is the truthy stuff and the narrative is just embellishment of it and and peterson and vervecky See that as fundamentally wrong narrative. In fact is the way we process this stuff. It's the only way we really can process this stuff No, we we need to do a lot constantly and I think that You know we we need to use this is this is one of the weaknesses of the rationalist argument I think is that we have to use heuristics to operate in the world. So heuristics are simply are simplifying maneuvers And we there's no option You have to use heuristics and the reason for that is because there is a lot more world than there is Of you and so you take this incredibly complex reality and you simplify it and now the simplifications have to have merit and And what makes them have merit is is grounds for a is a topic for a very long lengthy discussion But to produce those simplifications you have to use heuristics you have to use cognitive shortcuts and it looks to me like narrative is a heuristic and that The reason that we need to tell stories and that we probably need to have our ethic grounded in stories is because You can't make a list of rules that will tell you how to live Rules don't suffice but you can tell stories that are that lay out broad principles And those are heuristic principles now But the thing is is that the most fundamental stories seem to have a religious core now I'm not exactly sure why that is although I think it probably has to do with something I referred to earlier Which is the idea that you know you are as a soul you're the thing that transforms potential into actuality That seems to be the grounding concept in some sense so now It's helpful to notice that the soul is the actor is the agent in the story That the the soul actually is a function of this story verse of this whole heuristic Which is again, I think peterson is right the best and the and the the principal way the primary way we actually Manage to make sense of this far too complex world for small brain Short-lived creatures to actually live with and this is Exactly where you get god number one in the jordan peterson sam harris talk at the end of the vancouver one talk That's the grounding concept. There's something divine about that out of that arises a sequence of of stories that are shaped across perhaps evolutionary history and inside that are More articulated ethic exists and I don't see a way out of that Because you cannot make an exhaustive list of rules that enable ethical movement forward And you need to do that if you had a purely rational View of the way that human cognition functions. It's something like that Okay This again lays us right into the ian mcgurkress territory where you have the conceptualization of the mind of the right and left hemispheres That the right hemisphere, you know, whether that's literal or Metaphorically structured the right hemisphere being unknown territory and the left being mapped territory now There's always by definition more unknown territory an unmapped territory than territory and the reason because we only live this long and our minds are only this big and even of the Amount of possible experiences we have between birth and death or conception and death Even of that which we are physically Present for receiving even that we have to compress way down and you can even think about compression Algorithms for for pictures even that you have to compress way down Into this tiny little thing to get through this straw of consciousness So there's there's always more unknown than mapped territory and so the left brain mapping Which are rational reductions and the way reason works is reason is kind of a coherence framework where we're checking Does this go here? Does this relate? Does this does this connect up? Does this does this is do these are these things like if you have two lists you're checking do they are the sums the same? You're just going through one. That's what reason does reason tries to correlate things And so it looks at evidence does this seem right and does this check out? So so you have these rational reductions, but even the rational reductions themselves are heuristics you This is the point peterson keeps making you have to take a sample a reduced sample But just as let's say if you had You know this if you pay attention to photography Let's say you take this this picture and google. I use android phone google Uploads a compressed version of the picture I took and so I'll keep the Original picture I took but even that original picture I took had a certain amount of resolution the compression and they call it lossy Compression it takes that and it makes it into a smaller thing Well, how do you do that? You have to leave some things out of the compressed version so that it fits now we're always doing this and the reason we can you can tell you're always doing this is Show somebody a picture Take it away and ask them what they saw their salience will have them fix on certain things now If it's a very complicated picture You can begin to ask them questions about other things that perhaps are not in the picture and they won't know anything about this Peterson illustrates that with the gorilla With the gorilla video where the the people are passing the basketball and you have to count how many times they pass the basketball And a guy in a monkey suit comes into the middle Beats his chest and goes out and I didn't see the dude at all why i'm paying so much attention So it's that salience. It's that realization and so This is what happens and well one of the heuristics we don't have the algorithm that takes a A 24 megapixel picture and turns it into a file. That's less than a megabyte large We don't have that we have this other algorithm in our head and salience gets in there And so we pick and choose what's salient to us and that's what we remember of the picture And so our minds are always doing this and mcgillchrist says why are these two hemispheric brains so common in the world? Well, we've got one that's dealing with the big picture and the other that's dealing with the compressed algorithm And ian mcgillchrist says we get into trouble when we think that the compressed algorithm is the totality of the picture now one might Arguably say well, isn't that the problem of religion? Yes, it certainly is but it's a function of the human problem All right, you might say well i'm going to get rid of religion to get rid of that problem You won't get rid of the problem. The problem is that you are limited that you cannot take it all in You just can't process that way because of what you are So narrative is our best organizing psycho technology. That is our compression compression Algorithm and it does a number of things at once it both Selects what we pay attention to and it's able to it gives you basically something to give you a coherent Take the snapshots if you've ever seen that movie memento, which is a great movie He can't put his pictures together. So he keeps working from these snapshots and you have all of these different Um all these different storylines going he just keeps making up new storylines because he can't put the pictures pictures together Well narrative puts the pictures together and gives us a coherent story You might say but that story leaves all kinds of things out. Yes, we can't have it any other way On one hand we look at consciousness and say we say wow What an amazing gift of consciousness. I wouldn't want to live without it on the other hand It's a tremendously limiting thing that we have So we have become stories by it. We become persons actors in the story And by it we are agents in the world Okay But vast stories have tokens And and you'll notice this if you're if you're a couple you have special songs families have special stories special mementos and You know as a pastor you're regularly with people when okay someone dies They're breaking up the house and and and what happens is you sift through Everything in the house and you can't keep everything in the house So you take this memento you take this photograph you take this letter now what happens sometimes is kids are like I want to keep the whole thing And what I do is you say, okay And then you wait because well now they're paying You know now they're paying to keep an empty house because they want the the shrine to the life that they have lost When their parent has died and at some point they come to the realization I need to go into the house and take some things that are special and the rest of it will have an estate sale And everybody else is going to come in with their salience landscape and pick the house apart until it is no more And there we have loss Remember my two questions, what is the problem what is the answer? So you have these mementos you have these vast stories and they all come down into certain things couples have these families have these Friends groups have these and they so then you have sacred songs and sacred places and items that represent and embody the whole And in christianity you have this meal and on one hand it's very very simple Bread and wine and it's not even always bread and it's not even always wine it gets It gets down into this tiny tiny thing which has been back to the protestant reformation thing this thing that's been Fighted fought about over because it's the thing right at the center And if you look at the cross jordan peterson's observation heaven and earth right there at the center That's where this meal is too all of those things come together sacraments of the Worship and that's So when you if your if your parent has died and you go into the house and boom your mind captures something And you say there it is. This is the sacrament of the family This is where the story verse and the matter verse come together The story verse becomes physical the timeless enters time the logos becomes flesh Now tokens they begin there, but they get remembered Do this in remembrance of me now. Here's a picture Of this picture was probably taken before I was born. This is my father young stan vanderclay right out of seminary It's in the 60s. He's still wearing his his clergy They're not his vestments necessarily, but his clergy uniform. He's wearing his black suit and his clerical collar In the 70s he he put away some of those things and they didn't really come back now They're coming back into fashion But he's standing there with mrs Vogel who was a dear saint and a whole bunch of children from the community that they're helping And they're remembering the story and so what happens is that the sacrament the gift this the sacrament of jesus crucifixion the the wine which represents the blood and the body which represents the the bread and the body represents The bread and the wine represent Their they represent christ's giving and so when dad goes into the neighborhood with mrs Vogel and they've got this old bus they give to the children of the neighborhood Now erasmus versus luther on rights versus moral actions of the world. There it is. It's all right there How can we talk about this? Jordan peterson has the soul as the actor in the space of consciousness. Yes, but it comes down to These tokens that get remembered into then new stories So the story of stan vander clay and angie vogel as they're ministering to the children of the first ward of paterson, new jersey It's the body and the blood getting remembered into What would become northside chapel in paterson, new jersey, which would be the place that that I grew up in You have this process of back and forth in history weaves us into this far more cohesive story and so where you can now you can begin to see the power of story in the midst of this because Now I am an agent because of story in this world around and that is that is a far richer and More accurate telling than I am one object in the midst of other objects. So that's just sort of flat on a portrait Now well, how do these stories go here and where do dead ends develop? Well, one of the best books i've read in the last 20 years is this little book by alistair mcgrath Entitled heresy and again alistair mcgrath is going to be talking to brett weinstein. I am looking so forward to that conversation But a couple of quotes because you know this this word heresy is kind of floating out there Well heresies are elements that create narrative dead zones. All right We are not we're not required to accept prepackaged world views But are able to create ones that resonate with our own perception of how things ought to be So we all have these ideas. I think the world should be this way. I think the world should be that way Well, there is a world out there And so we try out our ideas with language and we try out our ideas with action and we see if What we're saying and what we're doing actually cohere to the story Which is both the story and the material world all together, all right And heresy as well. Well, we come in and we creatively we try something new. Well, here's the question will it Be fruitful in the story. Will it finally? yield to More story will it yield to what we might call flourishing So what is heresy? Heresy is best seen as a form of now he's speaking within a christian framework Heresy is best seen as a form of christian belief. So heresies are christian that more by accident than design ultimately subvert ends up subverting Destabilizing or even destroying the core of the christian faith Both this process of destabilization you can hear order and chaos in here. Can't you? Destabilization and the identification of its threats may be spread out over an extended period of time A way of making sense of one aspect of the christian faith such as the identity of jesus of nazareth an aspect that may initially Be welcomed and find a general acceptance may later have to be discontinued on account of the potential damage It is subsequently realized to be capable of causing so in other words you add things into the story and over Could be hundreds or even thousands of years you begin to realize That doesn't cohere You see elements of this in cs lewis's miracles where he talks about the grand miracle As the piece that fits into the center of the story We knew other pieces of the story and then when we see that piece we say ah it fits remember We're pattern seeking say oh the patterns are nicely do we know what it means that they're nicely not really But but we have a sense of it and so this is the process we're always undergoing and in fact orthodoxy and heresy always grow up together because you don't have for example the doctrine of christ until you have all of these ideas on the table and then you watch them all being worked out and you discover This is the one that works. What do you mean by works? It produces the stable cohesive flourishing system That is this ultimate story that is christianity that is the religion Now there's always two simultaneous threads there's change We think about it in terms of progress or sometimes corruption And some things displace the others through a sort of competition or winning or losing But you don't have change without same they they're both they're both there together because there's no change without sameness Otherwise, you've just got a series of disconnected chaps snapshots just like in the movie memento So there's change and they're same and they're always they're always working right there together with each other So the two core questions I had what is my or our problem? That's a process and and you're asking the question. What is perdition? What is loss? What is Death what is losing? What is lossness and then what is the solution because we're always sensing the lossness. Well, what is the solution? What's a process too and that's salvation. Well, what is salvation and you'll hear me When I do my conversations with people people will say saved and i'll immediately stop them usually because i'm a rude new jersey person Who interrupts people and i'll say what do you mean by saved? And and usually I kind of stop Because they realize they always use that word and they realize they've always had a religion in the back of their minds But seldom do people bring it up front. Well, you might ask well, what's the job of a pastor? Well, the job of a pastor is to help you bring your religion up front And then as a christian pastor i'm going to say okay. Here's the elements of your religion Here's the christian religion you might want to do some compare and contrast there because This christian religion has been around for thousands of years and they've worked out a whole lot of things It's not some crippled ideology They've worked out a whole lot of things and you're going to want to test your own little Personal religion that you've been creating now. It might be your little special thing and you think it's wonderful. That's great But you might want to compare it to the others because the truth is You'll probably learn something because a whole lot of really smart people have lived lives in a whole lot of contexts And have had a whole lot of suffering and a whole lot of joy and a whole lot of wisdom And this little thing that you're developing in you the soul Could be fed by the far bigger elements And so really i'm going to Up the resolution in the story hierarchy. What is our problem gets built into what am I or why am I here? Existential mind purpose and then the other what is the solution? Where are we going? So what am I immediately you see options, but some of these options are more dead-end ish than others The first definition the complex product of mindless nature Okay, and I was listening to Will durance the the story of philosophy and one of the you know, i'm always wrestling with certain definitions So probably do a word that fudge of nature at some point but but nature seems to be that which it's natural And and the best my best understanding of it is that which is not the product of of mind That seems to be our definition it's the product of of of patterns that Will hasn't at least this is again within a secular framework that will hasn't tinkered with and this is part of my problem with the Term supernatural because I would assert in terms of the christian story You might ask well what parts of middle earth have tolkien? Has are not products of tolkien's mind. That's actually a very complicated question But it illuminates the complexity of this word nature, so uh See this physicalism i'm gonna talk to vervecky about that because I think he lets in god but This this Materialist there's mindless nature. And again, I think it's we've been Motivated to kick god out because we don't want him there because he's emotionally troublesome for us There's a history of western secularity right there Another person might say a spiritual being having a material experience to hear that often from more pantheistic circles It's kind of a gnostic ish eastern answer And three christian answers Breath of god stuff of earth from genesis 2 an embodied story a living nephesh genesis 2 Image bearer of god genesis 1 and and so you have these competing questions of what am I and depending on how you answer this question There will be consequences in terms of your story verse that develop And again going back to paul maxwell's history of philosophy You have metaphysics that which is beneath it all that which makes up everything the ancients started there You have epistemology how or what we can know the moderns tend to start there Axiology what we ought to do and postmodern start there now I think there are consequences for for starting with epistel epistemology or even axiology and the consequences are You're probably going to have to have snuck in a metaphysic Or if you're starting with axiology, you're going to have to have snuck in an epistemology I think we're seeing that with the breakdown of critical theory so so if we leave the the underlying foundational elements unattended Well, you're probably just going to be smuggling stuff in And and world views have limitations and today actually I wasn't going to post this one today, but I posted my conversations with dr. James Because I thought it was such a good conversation and and he makes the point that snuck into a lot of the celebrity atheist stuff was in fact an Eschatology was a vision for the good life But but the metaphysic was snuck in beneath it the metaphysic of physicalism is that it's dependent upon the known physical universe and so if you're going to sneak in the laws of Physics without saying where they come from or that their eternal or that as Rupert shell great shell drake notes They they apply to every universe Well, you're you're you're kind of barking up the tree of a lot of God number one You have this implicit eschatology as as limited to the laws of physics which means that well When you die you die and that's a function of the religion that's a function of the worldview And that's why I like to push religion past well Just the rites and ceremonies and go beneath what the rites and ceremonies in that sacramental way are trying to connect us to because there's a metaphysic down below and You'll bump into these limits throughout an analysis of a particular worldview or particular religious Presuppositions that people are maintaining so another question. Why am I here? Well? Materialists will say there is no reason you're here. No formal or final cause purpose in this case is an illusion What's the meaning of life? It's a bad question There is no meaning there can't be because there's no mind to give it purpose there is a mind Here's another answer. There's a mind with intention that planned for you individually or collectively and or collectively and had a reason for your existence had a mission for you had a role for you and people feel this and people people like feeling this and when people don't feel this they Get nihilistic and they have a meaning crisis and then one of my favorite Christian ones. Why am I here? You're here for glory and it's dependent upon a seer and an enjoyer and a judger, but you're here for glory The world was made for glory What is our problem? Well, there's lots of answers given by religion over history There's there's there's suffering and I was fascinated. I'm gonna probably keep coming back to verveky's Analysis of the first noble truth of of Duca as Really decay which is actually quite close to my own theological system In terms of my reading of the Old and New Testament. So there's something for my Conversation with John verveky when that finally happens death decay rebellion against our maker Despair and some of these are emotional and that's very interesting. They're there of the psyche and therefore we have psychologists and psychiatrists that tried to give us health and wellness limitation Are we going to become unlimited? Well, how could we well it depends a lot on on the framework on the religious presuppositions of the story that you're looking What is our problem evil and Jordan Peterson mentioned? Well, he in Trying to help people get through their their issues They he has to bring evil into the story and have them wrestle with evil Disconnection from our source failing to realize we are part of the one all these different religious ideas out there hate Hate has become the substitution for sin now in the contemporary frame. What is the solution? My answers really start to peripherate proliferate trust obedience fixing fixing ourselves fixing the world fixing the problem Fixing every problem love they just they just come through Where are we going? Well lots of? Problem a lot lots of problems you get opposite, you know You get opposite answers place of no suffering is it a place or is that a time or is it a place and a time? No suffering no decay no loss. No death. No injustice limitations in the what we what we are questioned then forced limitations here and so with different different worldviews you will afford things like life after death or a place where the the hopes and dreams our present hopes and dreams are realized or a place where the Injustices are are dealt with and and so this develops all the way through But you can see where you start with these two questions and very quickly outcome out develop the hierarchies and As Peterson says people default to theological language and as the philosopher he made the same point We don't have another language that we can use and then the question is well Why are you so bashful about the old one? It's the most tested. It's the most common There's something to these archetypal observations There's a reason why the best movies tell the old stories and the old Walt Disney knew that the new ones They don't seem to know that so much and that shows that the change in culture We have this culture of authenticity that imagines that I myself and a deep well out of which can come everything we need instead of realizing that well It's it's such an amazing It's such an amazing move to make it actually makes perfect sense and a culture that says that I live within this iron box Now I'm going to imagine so I'm gonna cheat on the bottom because I'm keeping a hard surface at the top Why because I really don't want to imagine that there is a mind that will judge me or to whom I am responsible or That this world is somehow dependent upon If if I discover that I'm living in a simulation, I'll be ticked Well, your your your experience of anger and disappointment will be part of that simulation, too This is why you never get away from the religious It's it's always at the bottom you can't get outside of it as Peterson always says about the archetypal It's why all life connects to the religious layer It's why when you sit down and talk to someone and they're experiencing deep anguish and trouble you will get all the way down to the Religious that's where it will wind up. Why because this is what the language was developed for And in many ways the best stories win I would hope That's what we hope for and and they had in the objectivist conversation this thing about truth yet But not just propositional truth all of the aspects of truth all of the members of the family Ontological argument I like to it's very interesting when you apply the ontological argument to other things in the world So the ontological argument as applied to the story verse the best story we can conceive of is often limited to our ability to not Only imagine but to also believe and I think many people are bumping into this there They're sensing a better story and they want to believe it but beliefs aren't subject to volition so Actually, they come and if again you listen to Tim Keller who's who's a very adept Christian evangelist one of the things that he says and his considerable experience with listening to People convert is that they have to first want to not always CS Lewis calls himself the most reluctant convert and sometimes people convert kicking and screaming But but often they want to and in time the feelings catch up with everything else because You're not in charge of your beliefs. They in many ways Your beliefs are sort of like your feelings, but they're they're also different so The best story we can conceive of is often limited by our ability to not only imagine but also to believe and this is the heart Of the meaning crisis we believe too little This is where you get CS Lewis's beginning of his great sermon the weight of glory which if you've never read it you can find it on the internet for free If you ask 20 good men today what they thought the highest virtues what they thought the highest virtues 19 of them would reply unselfishness But if you had asked almost any of the great Christians of old he would have replied love you see what has happened a Negative term has been substituted for a positive and I'd say why And I'd say because of what we've done in Throwing away all of the language that now we're discovering we need I'll continue reading you see what happened a negative term has been substituted for a positive And this is more than a philological This is more than philological importance the negative idea of unselfishness carries with it the suggestion not primarily of securing good things for others But of going without them ourselves as if our abstinence and not their happiness was the important point I Do not think that this is the Christian virtue of love The New Testament has lots to say about self-denial But not about self-denial as an end in itself We are told to deny ourselves and to take up our crosses in order that we may follow Christ and nearly every Description of what we shall ultimately find if we do so contains an appeal to desire if there lurks in the modern minds the notion that to desire our own good and Earnestly to hope for the enjoyment of it is a bad thing I suspect this notion has crept in from Kant and the stoics and is no part of the Christian faith Indeed if we consider the unblushing promises of reward and the staggering nature of the rewards promised in the Gospels It would seem that our Lord finds our desires not too strong but too weak We are half-hearted creatures fooling around with drink and sex and ambition when infinite joy is offered us Like an infinite child who wants to make to go on making mud pies in a slum Because he cannot imagine what is meant by the offer of a holiday at the sea. We are far too easily pleased As a parent I've been there often you have your little kid and they're sitting there doing something and do you want to go out for ice cream? No, I want to play with my truck Okay, no, you really want to go on vacation with us you really do no, I don't want to and Sometimes our heavenly father grabs us and says you're going on vacation Because I love you and it's for your good maybe you'll cry in the car, maybe you'll kick against the car seat, but Christianity is a very optimistic religion Where our heavenly father sometimes takes us puts us in the car seat and says you're coming with me and You're gonna love it So words that fudge religion very fudgy word very important word to get a handle on