https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=HfbdvyJOJfk

 Hi, this is Paul and this is usually rough draft for Sunday. I'm really not sure how much of this is going to make it into the sermon or not, but I'm going to sort of talk it through and decide what I think about it after I talk it through. It's just kind of the point of these little rough draft exercises. Like a lot of my other videos, they're sort of reflections on things, thoughts at the top of my head, but these are obviously something that's going into the process of what will come out as a sermon on Sunday morning. Most, I think, in Sacramento are watching news of COVID and national politics and probably not paying much of any attention to what's going on in Canadian politics. But a lot has been going on in Canada around the remains of children that were found from the resident school program. I haven't followed it closely. There have been some toppled statues of Queen Victoria, of Queen Elizabeth II, the current queen, and there have been quite a few church burnings. In fact, there was one church burning in L.A. that is connected with this that I hadn't caught in the news here in Sacramento. News is by its nature very selective. And news organizations will put out news that they think will draw attention and that they think are pertinent to their audience. And for this reason, a lot of this hasn't really caught the news in North America. Now, all of this is very much a part of the continued, I think, end of secularity in our culture. It's going to take a long time. Secularity is in some ways sort of a subdued Christendom. And those residential schools were often religious schools, and children were taken away from their parents to be educated in the Queen's way of life. And for the most part, that's how countries work. Now, here in the United States, we have a separation of church and state. But in many ways, the state sort of becomes the church, as it were. And you'll find in the monuments in Washington, D.C., religious language. For example, in the Lincoln Memorial, it's called a temple. When the United States Capitol was rushed and taken over by a group of protesters protesting the defeat of Donald Trump in the election, this was called a sacrilege. And it just begs the question. There's a video channel called Religion for Breakfast, which I thought that quite a good video on, is the U.S. Capitol a religious building? And you'd say no. But then, well, many of the protesters thought that they were defending the Capitol from of the proceedings that were going on, which would obviously seal the election for Joe Biden, while many on the other side said that the invasion of the Capitol was a desecration of sacred space. So what exactly is sacred, and how do we know whether or not something is sacred? Now, the education of children is almost always a battle line. And again, for the most part, North Americans don't tend to follow much news abroad, but there's quite a conflict going on in the EU over legislation in Hungary that was set to basically control programming with LGBTQ content to children. And just here in Rockland, just a couple of years ago, there was quite a dust-up over a kindergarten student who identified as transgender and what that meant for the education there. Education is almost always a battleground because societies educate their children to one degree or another in what the society imagines is the truth. Now, there are sort of two philosophies of legitimacy that have arisen in the West, and the first is monarchy and the second is democracy. In a monarchy, at least in European history, God anoints a king or God anoints the leader of the church, let's say a pope, and the king governs the people. In the United Kingdom, where these statues were torn down, the queen is the defender of the church and has a very deep tie to the rest of the church, and the people are supposed to submit to the queen, which makes the toppling of these statues, particularly the statue of a present queen, quite a provocative act. And the Canadian government's either inability or unwillingness to defend the statue says something about how they stand on what is supposedly the way their society is governed. Now, it's a constitutional monarchy, obviously, in the UK, and people would call it a democracy. The queen doesn't exercise power to legislate, but she is a titular head. Now, in the United States, we have sort of a different system where we believe that God speaks through the people, and you can find both a church version of this, which is quite popular in Protestantism, but also in elements of Roman Catholic history, the conciliar movement. And in the Enlightenment, this takes the shape of the consent of the governed, to the point that Thomas Jefferson said of that capital which was stormed, the first temple dedicated to the sovereignty of the people. And in, for example, the Christian Reformed Church, we have office bearers, we sort of have a representative democracy where the office bearers represent Christ, and the Christian Reformed Church sort of parallel to the American government, we have sort of a representative democracy, we don't have a direct democracy. But both of these are sort of philosophies of legitimacy by which God speaks to and through his people. Now, one of the things that we saw a couple of weeks ago was that Paul was working with Priscilla and Aquila in Corinth because the Jews had been expelled by Rome. And I had mentioned this quotation, since the Jews constantly made disservances at the instigation of Crestus, he, the Emperor Claudius, expelled them from Rome. Now, that is hotly debated, and if you want to look at some of the debates, you can go to the Wikipedia entry of Claudius's Expulsion of the Jews from Rome. But for the most part, the Romans didn't really want to get involved in a lot of these religious affairs, but they would get involved when these religious affairs began to impact, well, the things that were germane to them. And why am I talking about all of this politics and legitimacy? Because in many ways, today's story that we're going to look at very much touches on this. Initially in Acts 9, we saw a conflict between first the Hellenistic Jews and the Hebraic Jews, which led to the election of deacons, the selection of deacons. And then, of course, there was conflict within the Hellenistic Jews in Jerusalem that led to the stoning of Stephen. And after Stephen was stoned and many of the Hellenistic leaders of the church fled and they ceded the ongoing evangelization of areas in that region further afield in Samaria and Caesarea and some of these places. The church through Judea, Galilee, and Samaria enjoyed a time of peace and was strengthened, living in the fear of the Lord and encouraged by the Holy Spirit. It increased in numbers. But now when we come to Acts 12, something else is going on. It was at this time that King Herod, that's a grip of the first, arrested some who belonged to the church intending to persecute them. So in other words, now there's a crackdown by Herod against the Hebraic Jews, who are the apostles. And we know this by exactly what happened. He had James, the brother of John, part of Peter, James and John that we meet in the Gospels, put to death with the sword. So this is really the first martyrdom of one of Jesus' disciples. And this is coming right here in the realm of King Agrippa. He had James, the brother of John, put to death with the sword. When he saw that this met with approval among the Jews, he proceeded to seize Peter also. This happened during the festival of unleavened bread. After arresting him, he put him in prison, handing him over to be guarded by four squads of four soldiers each. Herod intended to bring him out for public trial after the Passover. So Peter was kept in prison, but the church was earnestly praying to God for him. So James, the brother of John, was put to the sword. And it seems quite likely that Peter himself will be executed. Now what follows in Acts is a very interesting story about Peter's miraculous escape. We're seeing again this ongoing development. And what's interesting here is that the church is drawing the attention directly of the governing officials. And again, this is sort of what we see perhaps in the story of the expulsion of the Jews from Rome. Then we have this very interesting little story about Agrippa's death. He had been quarreling with the people of Tyre and Sidon, and they joined together and sought an audience with him. After securing the support of Blastus, a trusted personal servant of the king, they asked for peace because they depended on the king's country for their food supply. So you have sort of this internal matter. These kings over an area, they were supposed to sort of keep things smoothed over. The Romans had a fairly unintrusive mode of governing as long as taxes were paid and the peace was kept and the supply lines were kept open. Well, you know, Rome was fairly satisfied. On the appointed day, Herod, wearing his royal robes, sat on his throne and delivered a public address to the people. They shouted, this is the voice of a god, not a man. Immediately, because Herod did not give praise to God, an angel of the Lord struck him down and he was eaten by worms and died. Now I've mentioned before that the Book of Acts is a fairly fast moving book and Luke likes this sort of presenting boom, boom, boom, real summaries of things. Now Josephus, another ancient historian, actually has a parallel account of what happened here. And the reason I read it is because in many ways, Luke's account is through Christians' eyes. Herod Agrippa put James to death and was persecuting the church and here God is judging Herod Agrippa for his persecution of the church. But that would be through the eyes of the Christians. Well what about through the eyes of others? Now Josephus is a Jew, but he's got a considerable amount of experience with the Romans and probably gives a perspective that would have been held not necessarily by a devoted Jew, certainly not by a Christian, but let's say by someone that is out in the Roman Empire, a perspective different from the observant Jews and the Christians who are increasingly developing. This is what he wrote. On the second day which shows, so this is Herod Agrippa in Tyre, on the second day of which shows he put on a garment made wholly of silver and of a contextual truly wonderful and came into the theater early in the morning at which the silver of his garment being illuminated by the flesh, by the fresh section of the sun's rays upon it, shone out after a surprising manner and was so resplendent as to spread a horror over those that looked intently on him. So what is happening here? Well kings practice stagecraft and if you ever watch the Hunger Games movies you know that stagecraft is sort of a bread and circuses a way to keep order in a place and so he dresses in this garment of silver that when he entered the sun just made him shine like, as the pagans would imagine, a god. And presently his flatterers cried out, because kings often had flatterers around him, flatterers cried out one from one place and another from another, though not for his good, that he was a god. In other words, I mean Luke, this is obviously a parallel story, this is the same story that they're both seeing but in some ways through different eyes. And they added, Be thou merciful to us, for although we have hitherto reverenced thee only as a man, yet shall we henceforth own thee as superior to mortal nature. In other words, calling him a god. Now remember these are polytheist pagans, now Herod would have been a little bit limited in that given his relationships with the Jews and Luke sort of leans into that. Upon this the king did neither rebuke them, which is basically again what Luke says, nor reject their impious flattery, which is what he should have done. But as he presented afterwards, looked up, he saw an owl sitting on a certain rope over his head and immediately understood that this bird was the messenger of ill tidings. What does that mean? Again, we sort of look at him as superstitious, but for this is basically how people operated. This is you're looking for ill tidings from the gods. As it had once been a messenger of good tidings to him and fell into the deepest sorrow, a severe pain arose across his belly and began in a most violent manner. He therefore looked upon his friends and said, I whom you call a god am commanded presently to depart this life, while Providence, capital P, thus reproves the lying words you just now said to me, and I who was by you called immortal, am immediately to be hurried away by death. But I am bound to accept of what Providence allots as it pleases God, for we have by no means lived ill, but in a splendid and happy manner. And so he dies. Now, why do I read all of this? And why are we talking about politics? And why are we paying attention to topplings of statues and the turning of the page on a sort of civility and a centrism in American politics? Well, the ancients very much believe that divine spiritual powers ruled outcomes. God or the gods, Providence, capital P, the fates, they controlled destinies and one had better watch out and keep an eye on the gods if one knows how to operate. Smart leaders navigate politics on the ground and politics in the heavens to secure their preferred outcomes. As the church grows in the empire, the church needs to deal with this. Now, this is very important because, of course, as long as the church is growing in these Jewish sectors, well, what's at play? Moses and the temple and all of those issues are what's central. But Paul is now out there in the Roman Empire. And these are the kinds of issues that Paul is going to have to address. The Hebraic Christians under pressure and persecution now are spreading out, but the church itself is flourishing in the broader Roman world. Peter, after his escape from prison, went to open the door and everyone was afraid they thought it was his spirit, which is a whole nother thing, which I won't get into now. Peter motioned with his hand for them to be quiet and described how the Lord had brought him out of prison. Tell James and the other brothers and sisters, that's James the Just, not the James who was executed in all likelihood, about this. And then he left for another place. In other words, he got out of town to avoid being killed. The next verse, or now a few verses later, but the word of God continued to spread and flourish. So in some ways, now the Hebraic Jews are joining the mission. When Barnabas and Saul had finished their mission, they returned from Jerusalem, taking with them John, also called Mark. Now this is going to be important later on when Paul and Barnabas part ways. Now the church at Antioch, there were prophets and teachers. Barnabas, Simeon called Niger. Simeon was quite likely an African. Niger was basically the term for black. Lucius of Cyrene, another African, a North African. Manaian, who had been brought up with Herod the Tetrarch. So now we have someone of high status who likely shared the household with one of the Herod's and Saul. While they were worshiping the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them. So after they had fasted and prayed, they placed their hands on them and sent them off. Here again we see the pattern of the Holy Spirit guiding the process of the church. Now how the Lord communicated this to them isn't specified. Whether one of them had a vision or whether it was sort of a sense of hearing what was going on as now Antioch, after Paul and Barnabas had a year there of sort of getting the foundations They're ready to share what they have learned with others in other potential churches out there in the Roman Empire. Two of them sent on their way by the Holy Spirit went down to Seleucia and sailed from there to Cyprus. Seleucia was the port that was connected with Antioch. And they proclaimed the word of God to the Jewish synagogues. And this now would become the pattern by which Paul would reach out through the Empire. John, as later will be known as John Mark, or often known as John Mark, was with them as their helper. In other words, he was probably, some people attribute the Gospel of Mark to this particular John Mark, who was likely their scribe and would do for them whatever they needed done. This is something like Sam did for Frodo in the Lord of the Rings. They came through the whole island until they came to Paphos, where they met a Jewish sorcerer and false prophet named Bar-Jezas, who was an attendant of the Pro-Counsel. Ah, well, what's going on here? The Pro-Counsel, Sergius Paulus. Well, who is this man and what does he do? Well, he is a Roman official that is in charge of the island of Cyprus, which was a rather strategic place. And well, why would he have a sorcerer? Now Luke calls him a Magi. If you remember the Magi from Matthew chapter 2, he also calls him a false prophet. Well, who was this guy? We're going to learn a little bit about this, but it would be pretty much expected that such a man would be near a Roman official. Why? Because the Romans are always looking to the gods and they're not necessarily terribly picky. They're looking for the people who have the most power, who can direct their paths so they know how to govern well, because if you govern poorly, the least it would do is cost your job. It could potentially cost you your life. The Pro-Counsel, an intelligent man sent for Barnabas and Saul because he wanted to hear the word of God. Well, what does that mean? Well, Paul and Barnabas started with the synagogue, but increasingly a reputation had developed so that, well, these are people talking about religious things. Now, again, we have this line between religion and politics, which has developed and, you know, we're certainly in the sermon not trying to violate that, but Romans very much believe differently not in a secular realm that, well, anybody with new information about the gods, anybody who might offer power, anybody who might have new information that could pertain to how to rule in the empire, well, I should meet these people. But Elimus, the sorcerer, for that is what his name means, opposed them and tried to turn the Pro-Counsel from the faith. What happened? Very quickly, this Bar-Jesus saw Paul and Barnabas as a threat. What if he starts, what if Paul and Barnabas now have better miracles? What if Paul and Barnabas have a more rational or logical worldview that sort of fits with his world? Well, Bar-Jesus could be out of a job and he kind of liked his plum appointment and he kind of liked the having the ear of the Pro-Counsel and he really didn't want anyone interrupting his lifestyle. Now, this from a commentary, Paul's efforts to witness to the Pro-Counsel did not go unopposed. In the official's entourage was a certain Jewish false prophet called Bar-Jesus. Luke describes him as a magos, a term that could be used favorably as it was with the Magi in Matthew 2. It's also used as a sense of a charlatan, a trickster, a claimant to false powers, and it is this derogatory sense that Luke refers to Bar-Jesus. But one should not be altogether surprised that a Roman official could be hoodwinked by such a figure. Romans put great stock in the power of divination and even had their own sacred oracles. Charlatans like Bar-Jesus were usually smooth and highly knowledgeable, practicing a sort of pseudoscience. His Jewish credentials did not hurt him either. The Jews had a reputation among the Romans for their antiquity and the depth of religious knowledge. Josephus mentions a number of such Jewish sorcerers who had great success among the Gentiles. Bar-Jesus probably offered his services to Paulus in terms of divining future events for him, sort of an advisor, sort of a spiritual advisor. In any event, just as Simon Magus in chapter 8, the setup was a lucrative one and Bar-Jesus saw the Christian missionaries as a potential threat. In verse 8, Luke added that the magician also had the name of Elimos and that this is what his name means. The etymology is anything but clear, but the connection seems to be between magician and Elimos, not with, between magician and Elimos, not with the name Bar-Jesus. Then Saul, who was also called Paul, and now as we're leaving the Jewish context, we see Paul is basically the Greek version of Saul. We see Paul increasingly be called Paul in the book of Acts rather than Saul. And we also start seeing him mentioned before Barnabas. Filled with the Holy Spirit, look straight at Elimos and said, you are a child of the devil and an enemy of everything that is right. You are full of all kinds of deceit and trickery. Will you never stop perverting the right ways of the Lord? Now the hand of the Lord is against you. Now remember, this is a Jew. And so this, this talk about the God of Israel, Bar-Jesus would understand. Now how this goes in Hellenistic Empire is a little bit more difficult. Now the hand of the Lord is against you. You are going to be blind for a time, not even able to see the light of the sun. Immediately mist and darkness came over him and he groped about seeking someone to lead him by the hand. When the Pro-Council saw what had happened, he believed, for he was amazed at the teaching about the Lord. Now what's interesting here is now of course the miracle I'm sure made a deep impression on the Pro-Council, but Paul didn't just bring a miracle. It was also, as this text implies, he had been listening to Paul and he'd been figuring out the teaching and Paul's teachings fit into the broader picture of the Empire. Paul and Barnabas had spent a year teaching amongst the Gentiles and Antioch and Paul had basically learned the way to talk to convince a Roman high official of not only the power of Jesus, but the sense that Jesus made to the Roman world. Now everyone is trying to piece their world together and this is constant and we see this with all of the different changing of the guards in terms of what's right and what's wrong, what's true and what's false. You try to take all the truth and pass it on to the next generation, hence all the fight over schools. Do you get the truth from your religion? Do you get the truth from your politics? Do you get the truth from your science? Now depending on where you are in this culture, you might read the miraculous passages with skepticism. Many other cultures would have read these miraculous passages with a sense of validation. Others see miracles as proof of divine guidance as did this Roman pro-counsel. So does God lead from above or below? And I would say that's a false question. What is happening in this story is Paul continues to work his bridge. He doesn't exclude the miraculous. In fact, as Paul said to the Corinthians, he has more power and more credentials and then this than anyone else. And this was likely part of the reason that Bar-Jesus was fearful of Paul. But Paul didn't just come with a fancy trick to impress the pro-counsel. He integrated it into the wisdom that he had both from the scriptures and his knowledge in the broader Roman Empire and wisdom commonly available and reason which we would call general revelation. It's integrated with special revelation. It's integrated with the miracles and it's integrated with the Hebrew scriptures or the Bible, which it was for the very early church. And on the basis of this, the pro-counsel believes the book of Acts says. But what does that mean really? Does it mean that suddenly Cyprus became a bastion of Christianity? Well, probably not. What it probably meant was that bit by bit the pro-counsel was increasingly disposed to not look with skepticism upon this new group of Christians that were beginning to make their way in the empire. But bit by bit, he would begin to think about this. Would he worship with the Christians? It doesn't say. It just simply says he believed increasingly. And I think what Luke is communicating us through to us through the book of Acts here, these stories are, let's say, prototypical. These aren't all of the stories that happened to Paul and Barnabas, but this is an illustrative story of how the gospel was spreading in the Roman Empire. Would the pro-counsel be more secular or just following the latest wonder worker? Well, that's where the miracle of the blindness of Bar-Jesus has to meet the wisdom and revelation of everything else that Paul would bring. And so what this does for the early church is help them piece their world together within their cultural context. And as we started out talking about in the book of Acts, this is basically how Christianity, person by person, bit by bit, church by church begins to find its way into the Roman Empire and begins to develop into a way that Romans and Jews, Romans and Greeks would increasingly find attractive to participate and explore. And as we continue to get into the life of Paul, we have to get further and further into the details of what all this would mean. Well, what does it mean for us? Well, we're slowly entering into a post-secular phase and these movements take a long time. They move in decades and centuries. So we're just at the beginning end of this, but this is likely some of what we're seeing with church burnings, with statue topplings, with American, with some of the confusion between American political buildings being called temples or sacred spaces. Now some churches sort of fix on signs and wonders and say, well, that's sort of what we need, but in a secular space that's often met with skepticism. But there will likely continue to be miracles and God will have his way and he will do his will in our midst as he chooses. We'll continue to see turmoil and questions about what is real and what is true. And it likely will continue to deeply disrupt education, governance, and many of the other things that we've had a degree of peace on for the last number of decades. What should the church do? Well, I think the church should continue to follow the bridge that Paul developed, all of the balance that we see Paul using in his ministry. Churches in every culture learn to make their presentation within the culture and that's exactly what Paul does to the Pro Council. He's directed by God's spirit as they're directed to leave the Church of Antioch. They're guided by God's word. They're worked through in a community within God's church as we saw in the book of in the Church of Antioch and they're contextualized for the mission to present the good news of Christ's resurrection to the people at hand. That is what Paul did and that is what I believe we need to continue to do to work this Pauline bridge in the church today.