https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JlX10DETqyw

 And I think that's actually the benefit of having a Discord community where people know each other. Because when we know each other, we have higher resolution on the questions and the answers that we look at together. Also during the summer, my wife's school year, my wife is a teacher, an elementary teacher, and her school year has ended. Part of the intersectionality between my wife's job and my job is that she works Monday through Friday and I work Sundays, which means that throughout most of the year we don't get a weekend. So during the summer, I might be gone some Fridays and I'm talking to some other individuals who can do ask me anything, question and answer type things in place of me on some Fridays. I just asked Paul Anleitner, whose conversation I'll post probably Monday, and he was willing to do it. We had Benjamin Boyce and Andrea do one. So we'll do some of that, but I might also move it to another time slot. And it might be an afternoon time slot. The Friday morning time slot sort of benefits the UK, but is impossible for Australia. And we do have a fair number of people who listen from Australia, so we might try an afternoon time slot on a different day of the week on weeks I can't do Friday. Just kind of shake things up a little bit. So that's coming up, but I am live streaming to YouTube right now and I see that that's working. Rick, has it all set up? Yes, Rick is real. That should go on the bingo card. And so if you're watching the live stream and you want to ask a question, just putting it into the chat on the live stream won't draw my attention sufficiently. And so Rick will post a link to the Bridges of Meaning Discord and you can come into this Discord channel and you can ask a question live or you can post it in the text chat under Friday live streams, questions for PBK, and I'll see it there. So I'll keep an eye on the number of questions that we have here and probably around 1130 I'll end the questions that can be posted that I'll handle this week. But usually I leave some room for individual questions that are just asked from the floor as it will. We got a little noise coming in Rick. It's kind of hard to see if it's coming in through your headset Rick or if it's coming in. Okay, it's not coming through your headset. All right. So Rick's large and in charge as Freddie likes to say. Before I kick off any questions from the floor? Part of what I'd like to also use these Friday question and answer for is some pushback or some discussion about the videos that I posted this week. Now, of course, not everybody who's in the live chat has seen I put out about six hours of commentary slash monologue content this week and I wouldn't expect anyone to be able to necessarily keep up with that. But if there's anything, I noticed a lot of interesting back and forth in the comments about Michael Malice and his anarchy and of course Nate is around with his Christian anarchy. And so if there's anybody wants to say anything about the conversations that I commented on Barry Weiss, Michael Malice talking to Jordan Peterson or vaccine positions I took, I noticed those got some heat and actually I made a PowerPoint for a little bit more commentary on the Jordan Peterson Michael Malice video because there's I want to do a little bit more nuance on Malice's position, especially on a variety of things. And I might do a little short video on vaccines and just sharing some thoughts I have about those. But if anybody wants to jump in live now and say something about any of that, this is your shot. I'm less familiar with the Christian anarchy as opposed to just like regular political anarchy. I guess my kind of question on that is for both either Nate or Paul, is Christian anarchy more of a practice or is it a goal? Like, is it something that you're trying to get the world to actually go towards or if people start kind of going through the practice of Christian anarchy, it'll improve things. And for comparison's sake, I'm going to bring out something like yoga. Like, yoga has this idea that you're supposed to reach some kind of enlightenment. But for the most part, it's more of just a practice that affects the rest of your life in a positive way. And so I'll let you guys take it from there. Nate, why don't you I see that you're in the room and you unmuted. So you're the one that on the Randos channel has talked a fair amount about Christian anarchy. I think there's obviously some tension. Anarchy comes from Greek. The A in Greek is sort of an atheist is a non-theist. Anarchy is a non-archy. Arche is sort of first preeminent authoritative top of the hierarchy. That's what archaic means in Greek. So anarchy sounds like a sort of radical egalitarianism. But in a Christian context where there is a definite archaic and a definite hierarchy and in many ways a monarchy, there's tension in there. So, Nate, maybe you can comment a little bit on what you see as Christian anarchism. OK, I'll have to make this somewhat brief because I'm actually in the middle of a work email. But essentially, it has to be. There are priorities. Essentially, it has to do with the concept of autarky, like self-rulership. Right. Well, to be honest with you, from my perspective, only the Christian is actually capable of being a real anarchist because only a Christian is capable of true autarky because the only path to true autarky is in union with Christ. And that's really the core of it. And it's really in terms of Joe, yes, it's very much a practice. It's just like the secular version of it that is closest to the Christian idea of it is kind of like mold bugs, like living like an expatriate in your home nation kind of idea. It's like you belong to another kingdom. So why should you care about this? It's not. It's not going to act. It's actually going to keep you away from the path of true autarky that only comes through submission and conforming to the image of Christ. I hope that makes sense. That does make sense. Boy, it sure sounds like an Anabaptist position, though. So I haven't had a chance to see your conversation with Luke and with Julian. But seeing Julian in that mix really made me think of Anabaptism. And of course, Luke is, gosh, how to how to how to summarize Luke. I mean, he's sort of this free radical that flops between evangelicalism and Calvinism and orthodoxy. And Luke just seems to be a pleasantly unstable element in the bridges of meaning constellation. So, oh, wow. Thank you. Some super chats from Wendy and from Ike. My goodness. Very generous. Really appreciate it. I'm here just for the anarchy and chaos. And, you know, I part of the a lot of people pushed back in the comments on. Relating. Relating Michael Mallis's anarchism with chaos, and I thought that was a fair pushback. Yeah. I mean, part of the and I really like what you just said, Nate. I think that's I think that's quite helpful. This also gets into natural law. Because, you know, natural law, which is a term I don't particularly like, which, of course, annoys a certain element of my audience. Like there's a bionic mosquito in particular that's particularly annoyed by my resistance to natural law, as is there a Carl. Christians, Christians believe and assert that there's a definite structure to reality, which is at least to the degree that humans can know things knowable and relatable and relational. And so that's that's sort of why. I like I like the way you framed it, Nate. I thought that was very helpful. So and and politically, I I hear and I I hear Michael Mallis, especially when he starts talking about trolling. I see sort of this anarchism as a. As a as a practice, as a methodology in order to unseat. Tyrannical arcades. And that's and I can understand that as a tactic, I think, beneath it, though, is a is a anthropology, a theological anthropology that is overly optimistic about human beings. And. Because I'm, you know, because I'm a Calvinist, I'm also an Augustinian when it comes to human anthropology. And I think Peterson is even though he doesn't he never talks about Augustine, Peterson's anthropology is fairly Augustinian. And Peterson certainly would have come by that, I think, both via the Western canon, because the. You know, the American. Ethos is. I mean, like I said in my video, American culture is sort of a a mixture of. Reformed zealots and drug dealers. Now, of course, that's sort of a. Inflammatory way of talking about New England Puritans and Virginian. One of the reforms zealots give a guy say something quickly, Paul, if you don't mind. Yeah, good. I think that when I'm listening to Christian anarchists talk, what they're really just saying is, is something more like Christian pacifism. It's not like they don't believe in authority and hierarchy. It's that they just don't believe that it should use force to stabilize itself and to get accomplish its means. Right. And that it should be some sort of balance of persuasion from the top and healthy humility and submission, voluntary submission from the bottom. But that there's still hierarchy and cooperation and there's still the monarchy of Jesus at the top. Whereas anarchists like the one that Peterson talked to when he said that all cooperation was like tyranny or something like that, or all unity was oppression. Basically, you know, hard stop that is just extremely anti-Christian. Yeah. So I really think that maybe the Christian anarchists should pick a slightly different word, although it does do a good job of getting attention. But I don't think that's really what they mean. I couldn't have said it better myself, Sam. I think that's, that's terrifically helpful. Part of the reason Christian pacifism is responsible is because of the archaic of Christ. Because basically a pacifist will say, like Christ, you can take my body, but in the end I will win because of resurrection. And it presupposes a vigorous embrace of resurrection. And that's part of the reason I, although I am not a pacifist, I am very sympathetic to their practices. And I think, I think pacifism is sort of an extreme position. And I think it's a helpful personal position, but I think it's limited. I think it's balanced by what the apostle Paul has to say about the state having been given the by God, the sword. And we hear that from Peter and Paul. So, no, I think you said that very well, Sam. And that's, yeah, I think Sam said it very well, better than I could. So great. Really helpful. And this, this kind of back and forth with, you know, some of you in the community is really what I think a discord question and answer can facilitate better than say you guys leaving questions in Patreon or on a web chat or in a comment section and me just answering them. Because, you know, all of, all of us together are way smarter than just me. And so I think that's the, that's the power of a community. And part of the reason we're really playing with these tools is because we're finding out how these tools can create different kinds of communities that aren't quite so bound by time and space. But, you know, there's always upsides and downsides in there. So that's really awesome. Anybody else on this? All right. I am going to go to questions and answers. And, you know, as you guys, as we do this longer, and as you get to know me and as you get to know each other, the questions get harder. And by harder, I don't mean harder in a theoretical sense that I can't sort of lift up my eyes to the heavens and make up something that might sound cogent. But questions, because they get more personal and I have increasing reasons to dodge them, but I'm going to try not to dodge them. But yet I'm going to answer them carefully so that they both communicate and I also don't do harm to other valuable things. And Matthew's question is a good example of that. Hi, Paul, you spend a lot of time discussing those right on the tipping point between Christianity and not quite Christianity, such as Holland and Peterson. Let's see. I'm also trying to take notes as I go. Compelling radio. Okay. Those on the tipping point between Christianity and not quite Christianity, such as Holland and Peterson and that liminal space is where a lot of our attention has to be placed partly because of confessionalism in the Protestant Reformation. You know, if you watch, if you watch, so I've, I'm into season four now of The Last Kingdom. And I do think it's less, it's, it's not as good of a, I like the first couple seasons of Vikings better, but Vikings tended to fall off. The Last Kingdom does have some, it is good storytelling on some ways, but I really am constantly annoyed about how they treat spirits and religion. But if you, if you watch something like The Last Kingdom, you'll notice that the dominant frame that they're dealing with is, you know, that whole show was about struggle between the Saxons and the Danes, you know, in what would become England. And Christians are an identity, almost like a nationalism. Now, beneath Christians are Saxons and Britons and all these various tribal groups that eventually would sort of grow up to become something like nation states. And, you know, when you have the question of ethno-nationalism versus credo-nationalism, America is a credo-nationalist nation. America has a confession, and that's the Constitution and to a degree, the Declaration of Independence. The American form of credo-nationalism is a product of Protestant confessionalism. When a president of the United States is sworn in, he places his hand on any holy book and vows to defend the Constitution. That's a credo-nationalist. That's a confessional nationalist. And so the United States is multi-tribal, multi-ethnic, ethne, or the nations, but it's credo-nationalist. So as long as you, as a citizen, promise to submit to the confession of the Constitution and its derivative documents, you are a credo-nationalist. And what has happened by virtue of ideas of religious liberty is that most of the nations in the West have become credo-nationalists. And by virtue of immigration and mobility, you know, for example, if you were to say that the Netherlands is only for the ethnically Dutch, you would be an ethno-nationalist, but part of how ethne, race, and ethnicity has been disrupted by technology, you then would have the burden of proof to demonstrate an ethne on the basis of genetics. And this is, of course, where we got a question coming up a little bit later about the Jews. This is where the Jews are such an interesting group, not just because so many Jews are so very interesting, like Jacob, just to mention one, but they're such an interesting group because they have somehow managed at great cost to weather the changes that have happened in the world with respect to identity and category. So, now we're going to get to the table, don't worry, I am pointing, I'm heading in the direction towards the question that he's asking. If you're watching a program on Netflix like The Last Kingdom, who is a Christian? A Christian is someone who has been baptized. Now, this gets into what has become a regular new atheist attack line, which is, look at all the bad things that Christians have done, and that sort of sets up the no true Scotsman fallacy that rationality rules can sell you a card for. Look at all these Christians and how they behaved. These identities and categories have morphed significantly over the years. Now, in Christianity, a Christian is someone who has been baptized. If you look at, for example, Credo baptism, now my denomination, the Christian Informed Church, has what some people call pedo baptism, which means we do baptize infants. The whole worldview behind baptizing infants is this concept of communal identity. Now, it is sort of mitigated in the, it is not mitigated, but it is amended in the modern world by virtue of confirmation, or in the Christian Informed Church, we call it profession of faith, where someone who was baptized as an infant doesn't really become a full member of the Christian Informed Church until at an age where they can make a public profession of faith. They do that. They stand up in front of the community and take vows, and they take, in that sense, confessional vows. And it's in some ways analogous in the United States to the fact that when a baby is born to an American citizen anywhere in the world, or if a baby is born on American soil, they are an American citizen. They do not vote. They have not yet grown up into the rights and responsibilities of citizenship. They have limited rights, and they have limited responsibilities, but they are not, in that sense, a citizen. And this whole machinery that we are so used to in politics of citizenship and credo-nationalism is all an application of Protestantism in many ways. And so when you look at a program which, no matter how messed up it is in terms of trying to represent what a 10th century or 11th century Saxon or Dane living on Albion, living on that island off the west coast of Europe, would believe, well, the best you can do at this point is just try and read some primary source material from that period and then try and find a really good historian, because of course who leaves the primary source material but just monks, people who write. So even that is not necessarily a... It's very difficult to create a program that bridges the gap between 11th century England and the modern world and have it be compelling and interesting so that it provides the kind of interest that our attention comes on economy exams. Anyway, all that is to say, before I answer this question about the Lord's Supper, we need to address this question of identity. And one of the best analogies for that question of identity that is understandable for the broadest possible audience is in fact nationality and citizenship. Because in an ethno-nationalism, nationality is something analogous to membership in a church. Okay. Now, I've just crossed a whole bunch of other lines by bringing in that word membership. And yes, Joey, I'm going to talk a lot about this first question and maybe... But we don't have a lot of questions, so I'm going to excuse it. And it's my channel, so I do what I want. Because I think all of these issues are really quite important because they're actually beneath a lot of, like I say, these cheap attacks by new atheists and also very, I think, reasonable deconstruction hangups that happen with a lot of people. Because they say, you call yourself a Christian and you do this. Or, and you see it all the time, you see these tensions all the time in a show like The Last Kingdom. Because it is written by writers who are living in this tension. Because how is it that these good Christian kings are doing these truly heinous things? And the characters in The Last Kingdom who are sort of, you know, they say these things like, praise God in such a... Anyway, the attempt to represent faith in that program. And then you get someone like Bianca, who is sort of the father of Uhtred. You know, Father Bianca. And you know, so Father Bianca in that show sort of represents your contemporary pluralist, maybe a bit deconstructed mainline Christian who is trying at once to somehow represent the faith. And at the other hand, also be faithful to who in many ways is sort of his adopted son Uhtred, who is the main character and the hero of the whole program. So these issues are extremely difficult in terms of who is a Christian. And this question of who is a Christian or what is a Christian is so tremendously difficult to answer. And so this is where my version of Calvinism comes in. Because, you know, a Christian is anyone that God says is one. Yeah, well, how well is that accessible to us down here below? That's tough. So, okay, so now we're going to start moving towards the next sentence, which is, were they to attend your church on some tour of Sacramento? So Jordan Peterson, now COVID is lifted and he wants to do another book tour and he comes to Sacramento and Jordan Peterson, I have reason to suspect when John Vervecky had his conversation with Jordan Peterson, John Vervecky said, I know that Jordan asked John, you know, who are some other people I should talk to? And it's quite likely that John gave Jordan my name. And I don't know if that will happen. I don't know how well the conversation will go. But the ball's in Jordan's court. So if he wants to talk to me, he'll, he can obviously find me and I'll say yes. I say yes to Rando's. I'll talk to Jordan. There's only very specific situations in which I might say no to someone for the most part. My bias is yes. So let's imagine Jordan and I have a fruitful conversation and let's imagine it's sufficiently interesting to Jordan that we have another conversation and yada yada. So much of sort of what happened with Rebel Wisdom when Rebel Wisdom visited David Fuller and, and, and Ali Alexander when they visited Sacramento, it wasn't a communion Sunday. So there wasn't the opportunity for them to participate in communion. But if David Fuller had come, had expressed a desire to partake in the Lord's Supper, would I have welcomed him? Now, again, there's lots of layers to that welcome because in the Christian Reformed Church, the elders are the ones who fence the table. Now, right away, that fencing the table triggers an entire tradition, an entire central aspect of the Protestant Reformation. There's a church plant. So as I've mentioned before, my first 15 years here in Sacramento were predominantly occupied in terms of outside ministry of this church with church planting. And this issue of closed communion or open communion is a big deal in church plants. So get out your bingo cards. When I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic, they practiced closed communion, very closed communion. To be, to partake in the Lord's Supper in these little churches in the hills of the Western Dominican Republic, you needed to be an official baptized member of the church. But that got entangled with a lot of the credo nationalist questions, because almost all the nations in the West are credo nationalist because they're by virtue, they're so multi-ethnic because of the way that the immigration and colonization of the Americas happened. So to be a, in order to serve communion, the way communion happened in the Dominican Republic is we had a little group of us huddled at the front of the church. And in order to be in that circle, you needed to be a baptized member of the Iglesia Reformada in La República Dominicana. And the pastors there had incredible power because if you did something a pastor didn't like, he'd put you under three months of discipline, which meant no communion for you for three months. Bang. No appeal. Just the way it is, the pastor just decided that. The pastors were autocrats there. So what that usually meant was a tiny little group of maybe six or eight or ten of us. And first we would do foot washing, which to my delight was one of the things they would actually let me do because I was so high up in the status for reasons of their own. But because of that, I was Jesus. And so I got to wash their feet, which was an enormous privilege, an enormous pleasure, and a high point of my time in the Dominican Republic because I got to serve them. Often they didn't let me serve them because for their own reasons they needed me at a certain status level for their own welfare and the welfare and status of their community. But anyway, so we would do a foot washing and then we would partake of usually grape soda and a little bit of bread. And that's what we would do. And it was beautiful. But it was closed. And the reason I say it was enmeshed with nationalism was in order to be baptized in the Christian Reformed Church of the Dominican Republic, you had to be legally married to your wife, or at least to the woman that you were with, or at least to the woman that you had a whole bunch of children with. And many of the people there had a tremendously difficult time getting at least passively legal documents. And the way that many of them would get documents was they would at some point find some Dominican and they'd pay that Dominican a certain amount of money to say, oh yeah, you're my son, and then go register them. And so then they would have a new name in the Dominican Republic and they would have a legal document in the Dominican Republic that said that they were so-and-so Dominican son. And then they would then at that point, now that they had citizenship, they could get legally married in the Dominican Republic. And so I actually had a Sunday in which we baptized, married, and ordained a pastor all on the same Sunday. And he married a woman that he'd already had 18 children with. It's all these layers of archaic that we had to negotiate in order to sort of line everything up. And people who could do that could receive communion in the Christian Reformed Church of the Dominican Republic. And some of you might say, holy cow, is that right? Ah, why do you say that? Well, even by a highly Protestant theological tradition like the Christian Reformed Church, who 70 years ago only had communion once a quarter, and I could talk about those reasons, not every week, even though Calvin wanted every week, the Lord's Supper is a means of grace. So you've got all of these people who are faithfully attending these churches and chapels, those are two different levels of churches in the Dominican Republic, all these people who are faithfully trying to be Christians, and they never receive the Lord's Supper. Never. Until they get their documents right. And in order to get their documents right, they have to bribe some Dominican to perjure themselves before the government and claim them as a child so they can get legally married and then baptized within the church because, what else are you saying? You're saying that, well, you've got a whole bunch of people who are being baptized and they're living in sin because they basically have common law marriages because they can't get a legal marriage in the Dominican Republic. Maybe they could go back to Haiti, but could they get, you know, in other words, there's a whole world of complication that they're trying to navigate in this question in the Dominican Republic about who or who isn't welcome at the Lord's table. And some of you who come from theological traditions that have open communion, let's say a mainline church in America, have open communion, would say that's horrendous. There's a book I have, I think her name is Sarah Miles. Meyers, Miles, I don't remember, take this bread. She's a lesbian, mainline Christian, boy, I've just triggered a whole bunch of you, woman who wrote really quite a beautiful book about the power of the meal. Sounds Roman Catholic, right? So what I'm saying is that over generations, these lines get really long and really complicated. And when it comes down to something like Jordan Peterson is on tour and coming to Sacramento and, you know, Saturday night, Jordan Peterson and I who have all, we've just become best buds now. Me and Jordan, you know, we text each other and we're chatting all the time and he's always on my channel and maybe Jordan's low status so we can afford this by that point. But me and Jordan are best buds and Jordan shows up on Sunday morning. And what's he supposed to say to the elders? I act as if I believe in God. Now, the Christian Reformed Church tradition is one of closed communion. My mother was born and raised in Whiteensville, Massachusetts. She was baptized as an infant at Pleasant Street Christian Reformed Church. She went off to Calvin College, married Stan. She went to Patterson, New Jersey, raised three kids there. Every summer we would go up to Whiteensville. It's only three or four hours north of Patterson. And we would visit Pleasant Street. And sometimes if my father was there and they needed pulpit supply, they would ask my father to preach. So he would preach. And still, if it was communion Sunday, my mother would have to appear before the elders of the church in order to be allowed to take communion on that particular Sunday because she was not a member of that church. And in one level, that is crazy because at that point in the 70s, two-thirds of the church were cousins or distant cousins of my mother. They all knew where she was. They all knew she was Stan's wife. Stan, for serving communion, didn't have to jump through the hoops that my mother had to for partaking communion. And that was his wife. I mean, that's closed communion. And there are some real reasons for it because it takes this passage about not taking the Lord's Supper in an unworthy manner. And that's a whole other conversation. Okay. But that's closed communion. Now, a whole bunch of you are in the process of joining the Orthodox Church. And yeah, they take Catechesis seriously. Yeah, they take communion seriously. There is power to that. You just don't stroll into an Orthodox Church and take communion. Now, I can stroll into a Roman Catholic Church especially, and I'll let you Catholics fight over this because I know you already are. If I pick the zip code well, if I pick the parish well, if I pick the diocese well, I can stroll into a Roman Catholic Church and partake in the Mass. No questions asked. Heretic though I be, at least with respect to some Roman Catholics and how they view me. So does the Roman Catholic Church practice closed or open communion? When I got to this church, one of the elders said, we practice close communion. There's a theological innovation. And I never asked him what he meant by that because he probably couldn't articulate it, but I've spent 20 years watching the tradition of this particular local church with respect to communion. They don't do as Pleasant Street did back in the 70s of sort of, you know, saying, filling out a card as to whether or not you could take communion. They don't theologically practice open communion, but the elders who are distributing the elements have discretion. There was a Sunday once for a while we were having people come forward for communion because we were playing around with liturgy and some of those things. And a family had been worshiping church and the tradition of the Christian Forum Church is baptism as infants and profession of faith as young people. And there was a family that had been attending the church semi-regularly and a 10-year-old boy came forward for communion. And I paused. And my practice was, now I'm going to get into infant communion in a minute. My practice was, I didn't know whether I should serve this boy communion. I didn't know what this boy knew. I didn't know to what degree he was cognitively, rationally, intentionally participating in the sacrament. So I paused. And this little 10 or 11 or 12-year-old, it wasn't a very tall kid. I don't know quite how I was. He looked at me and said, I've been baptized. I gave it to him. I thought, okay, right there and then you answered my question. Now back to the church plants. We recently had a little church fight in one of our church plants over this question. Because the church planter, who is a very sharp guy, I'm not going to name him just because I don't want to get anybody into any trouble. And that's the kind of hardness I'm talking about when I started answering this question about a half hour ago. The church planter in his, in these church plants, oh gosh, it's chaotic. Now it's not, you don't have the same lines that you have in the Dominican Republic, but when you start a church, what do I mean by church plant? It's a brand new baby church. And when you start a brand new baby church in the Christian Reformed Church, you have people all over the map. If you plant a church from the Presbyterian Church of America, once people sort of figure out that you're a PCA church, or are they going to figure out, okay, no women pastors, no women elders? I don't know what the PCA does with respect to communion. But so basically what church planters have to do is figure out how to signal to the people who should and shouldn't come forward for communion. And the various church planters in the Christian Reformed Church, I've seen them do this in a whole lot of different ways. Some of them do so in, and actually Josiah is in the room today, so he might tell us what City Life Church is doing, but some of the church planters do it sort of in an existential feeling mode, which really connects well with Americans. And it goes something like, there's a brief description about what communion is. There's sort of a social way of saying, if this isn't right for you, please don't come up, just stay in your seat. You know, it feels awkward not to participate if everyone is doing it. So there's no stigma in not coming forward. So they say that. They also say, in sort of an altar call way, if you want to take next steps towards Jesus and towards public profession of faith, then you are welcome at the table. What does that mean? A number of years ago, there's a CRC minister named Tony Mann who wrote an article. And again, a small denomination like ours is sort of a family, and so we watch each other carefully. And what is written by our own pastors has weight to the degree that it, you know, a denomination like ours is really a moderate semi-permeable wall. And Tony Mann basically made an argument that in some ways, someone coming forward to partake of communion as a means of grace is in one respect sort of a response to an altar call. Now, again, for Orthodox, this would be, whoa, no, no, no, you're not taking this anywhere near as seriously as you should. And that's how Orthodoxy has framed it. But someone who is exploring Christianity and is, if I were to sit down with them to say, I am seeking Christ in my heart, I want to know him. I'm not ready to stand up and make the vows, but he's, you know, asking it shall be given, seeking you will find, knocking the door will be open. I want more of Jesus in my life and will being at the table move me closer to Jesus? And again, someone might say, well, that's sort of a high risk move. Jesus is a high risk guy. So, so some church plants do that. Another one of our church plants, again, they had this big fight because the pastor had always had in his liturgy and it was a written liturgy that's common in a lot of the church plants now that we have. We don't do it at Living Stones. All those who have been baptized are welcome at the table. And that's a really good ecumenical standard because communion is for believers. But it's also fairly loose or close because there's a line there and it's baptism and that's the proper line. So in the Christian Reformed Church over the last 10 years, there's been this movement of children at the Lord's table because theologically, some people in the church said, can you really bar children from the table? And the answer theologically in terms of the Reformed tradition is probably not. And that has been deconstructing some of the tradition of the Christian Reformed Church with respect to profession of faith. I watched my church in Patterson, New Jersey partake of the Lord's Supper for years until I was 17 or 18 years old and I made public profession of faith and then I could partake. There was something really powerful. It was a rite of passage. There's something really powerful about that making a public profession of faith. And so that was a good system. I really like that system. Now the Christian Reformed Church is moving towards children at the Lord's Supper. And they sort of halfway stepped it by saying children can participate if they go before the council and make an age appropriate confession of faith. And so that's the Christian Reformed Church's way of trying to have it both ways. But then that then is being tested because some people are coming forward and saying, wanting their infants to receive the communion. Oh, oh. So then there's a lot of theological reflection in the Christian Reformed Church on that and in individual churches. Now the particular church fight that happened in our church plant was the pastor had always said all of those who have been baptized are welcomed at the table. But because it's a church plant and because of the theological complexity of the American population, there's a whole bunch of people in the church plant who don't believe in infant baptism, but believe that children and infants should partake in the Lord's Supper. And theologically in the Christian Reformed Church, we look at that and say, whoa, really? You're not going to you're going to practice credo baptism and infant communion. Now, as a pastor, you walk into a family's house and you say something that I just said, and it's not a fair fight because I've just put a whole bunch of terms on them that they don't understand. Well, what metric are they using for who should and shouldn't be at the table? You know, the metric that they're using, the one that the other church plant uses, which is how does this feel to you right now in terms of your intentionality? There's a whole nother layer. So Tom Holland and Jordan Peterson visit Living Stones. So here's a scenario. Finally, here at the massive World Center of Living Stones, Christian Reformed Dumb and the Mother Church of the Bridges of Meaning Discord Server, we have a conference. And I get both Jordan Peterson and Tom Holland on stage together and I do a conference. And the conference is Friday and Saturday and Sunday is church and I'm preaching and we're having communion and Jordan and Tom stay. All right. Let's talk about this Jordan and Tom. Here's a question. Has Jordan Peterson been baptized? I don't know the answer to that. But if you'd ask me to guess, I'd say probably. Why? He spent the first years of his life in a mainline church in Canada. Mainline churches often practice infant baptism because in some ways they continue to be descendants of these Protestant, confessional state churches of Europe. So it may very well be likely that Jordan Peterson was baptized. So under that term, he's welcome at the table. He's been baptized. Tom Holland also. He spent the first years of his life till he was six or seven in the Church of England. Does the Church of England baptize infants? Yes. Was Tom Holland likely baptized as an infant? Yes. So Tom Holland could have communion too under the question of he's been baptized. Now, 1970s closed communion in the Christian Reformed Church. They would have to appear before the elders Sunday morning, early before church, and make a confession of faith to the elders before the elders would allow them to be baptized or to be to partake in the Lord's Supper. Our elders here haven't practiced that in the times that I've been here. Will they take it up again someday? They might. If they feel that it's needed. Right now, the elders are showing discretion. Do they show sometimes too much discretion or too little discretion? You can probably argue with them, but they're the ones who are seated in authority to take it. So that's my answer. And that's the fence. Now back to the fence. Conditions of crossing the fence, because you mentioned that word fence. And that word fence is theologically important because what had happened and part of what the Protestant Reformers pushed back on is that in some places in Europe, people didn't have access to communion. Maybe once a year at Easter, they would partake of the Lord's Supper. And for some of you Catholics that look at Protestants, they're having communion once a quarter or once a month and say, Oh, gosh, you Protestants, you don't have communion enough. Now Protestants are having communion every week. I, in fact, was just at Granite Springs Church, I'll name that church, this Tuesday. And during COVID, they've had Tuesday Eucharist. And they're even taking on these Eastern Orthodox names because I know that that pastor who's a high status pastor in the Christian Reform Church is in possession of an Orthodox icon sitting in his office. A hundred years ago, his iconoclast theological ancestors would have been appalled. But there sits this icon. I see it when I go into his office because one of his close friends is an Orthodox priest who's a terrific Christian. I've met him. I've heard his story. He's an amazing man. He's a great, great priest up there in Rockland or Roseville, California. It's a great church. So as we are continuing to process the Protestant Reformation, one of the things that happened in the Roman Catholic Church is that the fence came down. And Roman Catholics as a body are, some of them, having communion way more than a whole bunch of Protestants. And why did Christian Reform Churches 75 years ago only have communion once a quarter? Some of them still do. Well, that's because the Christian Reform Church replaced the confessional, where you confess your sins to a priest, with the house visit, where you confess your sins to the elders. Because you need a house visit. You need to make confession to an elder before you can participate and partake of the Lord's Supper. And that's a real high standard of not having a house visit. Now, the way that got popularized in the Christian Reform Church was a liturgical tradition where, so as not to, to be a part of the sacrament, but to be a part of the sacrament. And so the Christian Reform Church was a liturgical tradition where, so as not to be a part of the sacrament, but to be a part of the sacrament. Taking it in vain or misusing the sacrament. Now, the way that got popularized in the Christian Reform Church was a liturgical tradition where, so as not to partake in an unworthy manner, Christian Reformed people, and this is an amazing thing, I should probably write about this, because now that I've seen the church much more broadly, reflecting on my own denomination is more interesting. In the Christian Reform Church, what you needed to do and what you learned to do before you partook of the Lord's Supper was to sort of do an internal moral inventory to figure out if you've really sinned badly last week. And if you feel really sorry for your sins right there, right before you take communion, that's what you need to do. Now, ironically, this is analogous to one of their church plants that gives basically the pre-communion talk of authenticity. And you might say, boy, that authenticity surely was really postmodern, but in many ways it's analogous to what the Christian Reform Church was doing before where I have to feel really, really guilty in order to sort of feel really, really forgiven by partaking, and that's the worthy manner by which I partake, which is completely disconnected from any contemporary exegesis of 1 Corinthians 11. So, Matthew, I hope you appreciate the question that you asked, because my first thought was, I'm not going to answer this question, because in order to answer this question with the specificity that you asked it, I might very well get myself in trouble within the internal food fights of the Christian Reform Church. And the only way to not get myself in trouble is to basically address all of the outstanding Christian issues built into the tradition of the Christian Reform Church with illustrations from all over the world and contemporary ways in the Christian Reform Church. So that was my answer, and that's why the answer took 45 minutes. So beware of the questions that you answer. The more powerful the question, I'll either duck it or I'm going to have to talk for an hour. It's a great question. And so if Jordan and Tom came, they'd probably participate if they wanted to, if it was authentic to them. And what I would probably say to them is, you're welcome to participate if this is you seeking Christ. And I think at this point Tom Holland would. I think Jordan Peterson probably would, but there's a fair amount of other layers in there for Jordan Peterson. But would I welcome him to the table? Would I serve him communion? Probably. So there's my answer. All right. Somebody in the comments, somebody here is going to have an issue with this. I haven't even dared to look at. I don't even dare to look at what Anselman is going to say. Yeah, go ahead. I had a quick comment about like the frequency of mass attendance in the Middle Ages, which you actually got right. It was actually very infrequent, contrary to what Richard Rowland keeps saying. And this is actually important to a difference between the medieval mind and our mind and the difference between our individualistic worldview and the Catholic personalist worldview. Because even though individual Catholics were only attending mass very infrequently in accordance with the requirements of the church at that time, the mass was still being performed daily by the priests. And believers thought that that was efficacious for them and they didn't feel that they had to go to mass with this kind of frequency. That really only happened as a reaction to the Reformation. And that's because the medieval mind was still more naturally personalist and less individualist than we are now. So that's the only thing I wanted to bring up. That's a great point. See, we're smarter together. I couldn't have made that point, but that's a great point. And it also demonstrates the, I think you're right in terms of personalist, and it was also much more communitarian than individualist. Because the priests are doing it for me. The monks are praying for me. And so this sort of two-speed, which Charles Taylor talks about, made perfect sense for them because they were in many ways in communion with the monks and the spiritual athletes. And so part of, you know, I keep having this argument that the Protestant Reformation was going to happen. The Protestant Reformation happened because of the evolution of a whole bunch of things underneath theology that forced changes in practice and theology. Was it a good thing or a bad thing? Well, you know, we can debate that forever, but no, it's a great comment, Nate. Anyone else want to make a comment about this? Because I poured a lot into that answer. All right, we'll keep going. This is another good question. There's a lot of good questions. We'll see how many I can get through. Congratulations. I commend you for this. And I wanted to check if this is normal. What is normal? I have struggled with daily porn addiction for almost two decades. I am, you have my, you have my heart. That is, that is a heavy burden. Tried many times to stop. Hadn't worked. Tried asking God to help. Hadn't worked. A couple of weeks ago before bed, instead of doing my usual prayers, I just focused on confessing my own brokenness and inability to deal with this issue and for God to help me. Afterwards, I felt like I should move, compelled, delete the porn off my computer. It seemed odd since I have had internet whenever I wanted, but I did anyways. But I did anyways. Since then, I have not felt the desire to look at pornography at all, like zero. Not like I am fighting back temptation. The desire is just gone. I am trying to make sense of this from my modernist perspective, because that isn't how habits work. Not at all. Habits and addictions are not like light switches. You don't just turn them off when you feel like it. Basically, I am trying to make sense of this and any insight would be appreciated. Why now? Why didn't prayer work before? Was it because I was more fervent? The focus on confession. Why would deleting it matter? Is this type of behavior change normal for Christians and just no one mentions it because it's so normal? I'll answer that one first. No. Does it happen? Yes. I'd say it is infrequent and I would say it is blessed. Sorry if this seems crazy. It's not crazy. I'm so glad you asked this question. I'll use Unbroken, the book. Louis begins with a Z. I could guess at it, but I'll be wrong. It's not Sam Boney. That's the thing that you fix the ice with. A whole bunch of other few Z names I have in my head are going through, but not the right one. He tells the story and the whole book. Don't watch the movie. Read the book on Broken. It's an amazing book. It's just a tremendous book. Laura Hildebrand wrote it. I think that's her name. This guy suffers just unbelievable trauma and is a really incredible guy. I think it's a great book. I think it's a great book. I think that's her name. This guy suffers just unbelievable trauma and is a really incredible guy. He survives the most barbaric Japanese internment camp, comes back to North America, becomes an alcoholic. Of course. Anybody who knows anything about trauma knows, of course, he became an alcoholic. This guy who was a world-class sprinter, a world-class runner, set the record for how many days in an open raft at sea, only to be rescued by the Japanese who tortured him horribly, came back to the United States, had business success, married the woman of his dreams, and was destroying his life on alcohol. Goes to a Billy Graham crusade, walks forward, never went to AA, never went to rehab. Jesus beat alcohol. Does it happen? Yeah. Is it normal? No. Most times, alcoholics come to me, get into rehab, do a 12-step program. It's probably going to be a fight. But I thought when I became a Christian, I wouldn't be addicted. No. But does it happen? Yes. Now, can, as we learn more about addiction, in fact, right before this, I was, in fact, I have it up on the browser. I won't say it's accidental. I say it's providential. Someone in last week's PVK question-answer real-time text chat dropped the TED Talk of everything you think about addiction is wrong. And if you've watched some of the Vervecky stuff and you know something about addiction, thinking about addiction as reciprocal narrowing and reciprocal broadening, and thinking about addiction in a more contextual way, some of those ideas might, gosh, even how to think about it, some of those ideas might be able to, in sort of the 17th century seeking God through natural theology way of filling out how this might have happened, because you're in the midst of a conversion by, and again, I don't know who you are or anything, but just a little bit of a hazard speculation by virtue of what you wrote here, Christ is changing you. This week I preach on Paul on the Damascus Road and for the last couple of weeks, and I've done this before on my channel, Stephen is stoned and Paul is holding the cloaks and the heavens open and Stephen sees Jesus seated at the right hand of God and says so and Paul's sitting there and it's like, you know, Lord, if you're going to open the heavens, give a, you know, flash over to Paul there who's holding the coats. And convert him to save those poor Christians the persecution he's about to meet out. Nope, doesn't happen. Wait to the road to Damascus and then bang, the guy's turned around and Jacob can weigh in for better for worse. This is part of the reason I'm a Calvinist. God does what he wants. He's the potter, we're the clay. We can't figure this stuff out. I had a conversation yesterday with a podcast. This guy has a very interesting YouTube channel over a million subs and he's got an audio podcast, which is different from his YouTube channel. So I don't think our conversation will be on his YouTube channel. I think it'll be on his podcast. But, you know, if you really, you know, there's, you know, there's all these questions about what the heck is Paul's crazy Calvinist. He's not, he's not John Piper. He's not, you know, is he even Christian Reformed? What on earth are we going to do with VanderKlay? You want to know the heart of my Calvinism is that God's grip on me is more important than my grip on him. And that's part of the reason for my answer about communion is you came. Now, were you more earnest in this confession than others? I don't know. I can't, I can't make that measurement. Is this just God's timing? I don't know. I can't answer that question. But God's grip on you is more important than your grip on him. And that should give you a tremendous amount of comfort and joy. So Andy Kivenhoven, who used to be a Christian Reformed minister, wrote a devotional book on the Heidelberg Catechism and called it Comfort and Joy. First question and answer of the Heidelberg Catechism, What is my only comfort in life and in death? That I am not my own. That my relationship with God is not something that finally is up to me. Do I have responsibility and agency in it? Absolutely. But his grip on, his ability to hold on to me is much more important than my ability to hold on to him. Because if it's up to me to hold on to him, I know my fickleness. I know my sinfulness. I know my weakness. I want a God with a strong grip. And I want that strong grip on me. And that's what I'm going to bank on. And so I'd say praise God. I don't know if it'll last. I pray it does. But, and this again is why I'm a Calvinist. Because we, you know, in terms of democracy, we have this meritocracy. And we sort of implicitly apply that to Christianity. And we're not going to be able to do that. And we say, oh, you know, the degree, the degree of your, I'm saying it in such a consumer way, the degree of your satisfaction of being a Christian is dependent on how hard you work at it. There's something true about that. Because, you know, here's another AA saying, you know, if you work it, it'll work. Meaning, you know, I've seen lots of people find joy and renewal in 12-step programs. And I think, you know, I think 12-step programs are what, 50, 60% efficacious, at least first time in. Which is better than nothing. But if you work it, it works. All right, great. And so, yeah, you should, it's both and you should work. You should seek Christ with all your heart. But I'm, I'm, I'm a mess. So I need him to track me down. And, and so you have some people who are amazing Christians. And they're just amazing Christians. And it's just been God's grace. And it's, you know, someone who maybe will struggle with a porn addiction. Andrea, are you doing the dishes? Oh, someone muted her. Someone who's a porn addict who might struggle with this for the rest of their life. They might listen to this story. They might make them angry because they say, God is unfair. Here's the thing. Any charge that we bring to God that he is unfair is always a function of our ability to judge the world. And so when we do that, we judge God. And that's why I don't think we can judge God's fairness or not. Just like a two-year-old can't judge their parents' fairness or not. And in fact, once they become a sixth grader, sometimes they'll say, you treated my brother this way and you treated me this way. That isn't fair. And the parent will say, you're two different people. And I have what's best in mind and I'm going to do it. And sometimes that means it's not going to be fair, that there's going to be different rules for these two kids. And that's because I love you both. And I believe that with respect to God. When we come to God and they say, you're not fair, you, you, you healed him of his porn addiction. Bang! Why didn't you do that for me? Go ahead and ask God. Ask me anything is 24-7 with the Almighty. Okay. And I think if he were to sit down and take you in his hand, meet you in the eye, he'll say exactly what he said to the apostle Paul. My grace is sufficient for you. My powers made perfect in weakness. So is it normal? No. Is it blessed? Quite possibly. Well, at last, I hope so. There might be other challenges for you down the line. And so God in his grace decided to just answer your prayer and remove this. Why now and why not before? Another super chat. Thank you. ABC. My goodness. I can't answer those questions. And that's why I'm a Calvinist because a Calvinist sort of has the right to say, God knows. He chooses. He decides. He acts. Is it arbitrary? No. And of course, the scariness of Calvinism is how far does that go with God? And of course, in some ways, Calvinists say all the way. But God is also not arbitrary. We know that. I mean, I loved in that. I only saw, I only watched part of the, the Randall's conversation with Nate and Luke and Julian. And Luke talked about God not being a respecter of persons. See, part of the problem of being a human being is that we're short lived. We're not as smart as we could be. We only can know so much. And that limitedness is part of what we embrace with God. It's part of what we embrace. We say, and that's where we say we come before his throne and say, Hey, I know myself. I know myself. I'm faithless. I'm fickle. I'm weak. I'm not anywhere as good of a Christian as I should be. I don't hope to measure up to the standards set by my Lord in the Sermon on the Mount. But to the degree that I can, I will promise to be your servant and I'll offer you everything I have. That's what a Christian is. And there are some days you just feel like, Oh, screw it. I don't want to be a Christian. So I praise God. I praise God for what he's done for you. And I hope he continues to work through your life. And I hope that you continue to work through your life. And again, to those who say, I wish God would do that for me. I'll give you the Apostle Paul's answer. His grace is made perfect in weakness. And if you're struggling with something, and again, this is why. So talk to, you know, Chad's around here. He's, you know, he's outed himself in terms of his 12-steps, a few of the others of you have. That's why they'll always be 12-steppers in church, because what they get in there is something integral to the faith, which is this confession, I am not my own. something integral to the faith, which is this confession, I am not my own. Thank God I am not my own, but belong life and in death and body and soul to my faithful Savior, Jesus Christ. Can I trust him who has fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood and sets me free from the tyranny of the devil, watches over me in such a way that not a hair can fall from my head. Look at my head! He let all these hairs fall. I would love to have the hair I had 40 years ago. I don't! Not a hair can fall from my head. What the will of my father in heaven. You mean God wills that I be bald? Guess so. Sorry, VanderKlay. Bald is for you. Here we are. So there's my answer. Shosh Jewels. Hi Paul, I'm quietly listening to your channel and often pick up books you mentioned, I read silence and found it difficult. It is a difficult book. And that kind of difficulty, like Matthew's first question, it stretches us. You know, all good things are difficult so often because I couldn't stop thinking about it. I then watched the motion picture. I haven't seen the movie yet. Would you comment on your takeaway from the peach trampling on the food? Is it an act of love or defeat? Yeah. As a Jewish person, I grew up with my father warning me one day they will come and get us. Now as a Jewish follower of Jesus, I anticipate persecution from antisemitism and I fear anti-Christian action will not be far behind. I've always imagined standing firm until I read and watched silence. Yeah. And this should, this should, so again, I'll say a number of things. Donatist controversy. That was the, that was a theological context in which Augustine lived and worked. The Donatist said that priests who recounted in that context would be similar to stepping on the foomy priests that left the faith should not be let back into the priesthood. That fair point. They didn't stand firm. Look at the New Testament passages about, you know, denying Christ. Yet Peter denied and was restored. So back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. And the Catholic church position was, no, we'll let them back in. And so quite likely Monica, Augustine's mom was a Donatist and Augustine became Catholic and the Donatist movement passed away. That's how church history works. So I got the gay question again on the podcast yesterday and I gave him my honest answer. Is it possible that 300 years from now, the whole gay thing? Is not a thing at all. Yeah. Is it that way now? No. And so will there be winners and losers? Yeah. But churches, churches decide things over long periods of time, very long. And what is beautiful about that book is it illustrates the fact that actions, you know, I often, you often hear me say narratives are massive compression engines. Actions are sort of in my video this week, I talked about data, narrative and icon. Actions are like icons, especially if we're consistent in our work. Actions are consistent in an action in that the decision to step on the Fumi takes a world and puts it into an action. And that's because the world is in that action. And of course you see this definitively in the actions of Jesus and the crucifixion and the resurrection and the ascension and the second coming. And compresses it all down into, into a singularity, one point. It's amazing. But in that story and that's the power of that narrative. So what's better to step on the Fumi and save the life of these, of these people that you've helped convert or to not step on the Fumi and have their lives be taken. Now, on one hand, you could look at that and say, well, it's better to save life. So you should step on the Fumi, even endanger, even run the risk of damnation in order for the love of the people. Well, that's powerful. Well, let's take it a second order because well, let's say you don't step on the Fumi. The people that you have converted, you're in a sense, their archaic. You're their head. And again, look at a medieval model. You're the priest. They are, you have to be holy for them. So you don't step out, you step on the Fumi. They see that and they say, Jesus isn't real. Now they're all in jeopardy of damnation. So what do you do then? Or maybe you step on the Fumi and say, or you don't step on the Fumi and say, kill them and then kill me and we'll all be together in paradise. Is that the better way? You have to answer that question by your action. And by virtue of the question I just answered before, we're all limited and sinful and weak. So, but yet we've been given this agency that quite frankly, we don't deserve, which to me is one of the great arguments for if you believe in a Christian God, this world has some quality of a sandbox where, you know, Peter denies Christ and he gets restored. Judas betrays him and he's damned. And I'm not going to get into the question of is Judas in hell right now and universalism, yada yada yada. I'm not going there because all of you have to, the level of it, you have to deal with these stories at the appropriate level of analysis and not push them too far. And that's not making a statement. I've already talked about universalism and why I'm not one, but you still have to deal. It's like the story of Lazarus and the rich man. You have to deal with that story at the level of analysis and not push it too far. The story of the prodigal son. You have to deal with that story at the level of analysis and not push it too far because it's a parable. And to say it isn't true because you couldn't locate and map that onto a particular, yada yada yada. Anyway, too many disclaimers. So yeah, it's a great question. And I think about my own Jewish ancestry. Looks like my ancestors, Jacob was helping me dig around in some of that stuff and others of you have too. You know, some of my ancestors became very nominal Jews in Northern Netherlands and started marrying outside the community. I don't know why my great-great-grandfather sent my great-grandfather over here and none of the rest of his brothers came to America. What did he do to tick off his family? What did he do to so screw up his life that he had to try living in America? But so that particular branch of the family tree came to America and was spared the Holocaust. So the other branches of that family, if you go back far enough, I can find them in the records of Sobibor. Sobibor and other places because most of the Jews who were killed were killed by bullet and not by gas chamber. Read, Timothy Snyder writes about this. So yeah, will persecution come? Maybe. I just read something recently that so Chinese persecution of the church in China is very real. And what a lot of Chinese pastors fear is the end of persecution because they know that the end of persecution would make them soft. And what they're, this is the craziness of humanity and it sort of maps on to the answer of my grace is made perfect through weakness. These Chinese pastors in their persecution have a union with Christ that I probably can't and won't experience in my affluence and comfort and laziness. And I know that because there have been periods of my life when I wasn't persecuted by the government for being a Christian. I wasn't persecuted by the government for being a Christian. But there were crosses I had to bear that I could not have endured without the daily presence of Christ in my life. And so during those times in my life, I sought him in a way that I often don't and often don't now because things are easier, things are better. But there was a sweetness in my communion with him during those times that I also don't enjoy now. And so when the apostle Paul says my grace is made perfect in weakness, I know what he's talking about because, and I know how this maps on to the porn question, because I know what it means to plead with Christ. Can you please resolve this issue and take away the pain? And Christ says, no, I won't. Why? Because you know, Paul, when you're not in any pain, my visits with you are perfunctory, indifferent, maybe even haphazard or sporadic. You know, you come to me when you want to be my friend. It's sort of like, you know, what the Godfather says to the undertaker who wants a guy who abused his daughter to be killed. You're not showing me a lot of love, Paul. Now, again, some of you may have heard of Paul. You're not showing me a lot of love, Paul. Now, again, some of you can say, hey, what's this Calvinism you were talking about before? Aren't you saying you have to seek God? Yes, you do with all your heart. And so when in times of my life or search situations, I'm not going to talk about here. I was really feeling under the cross. I had a sweet communion with Christ that I don't regularly enjoy as much now. And so those Chinese pastors that say what we fear is the end of persecution, because right now I am blazing hot for him. Now, might they send in that blaze? Yeah, sometimes we do that too, because that's how we are. But those Chinese pastors know if all you have is Christ, he is more than enough. And they can testify to that in ways I never will. And that's why the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the church. Tertullian was right. Was it Tertullian? I think so. Sam will correct me if I'm wrong. So, I think that's why I'm saying that. Yeah, will persecution come? It might. And if it does, it's everything that the Bible talks about. That's the fiery furnace. The dross will be gone. And some who are wobbly will become mighty, mighty men of God and women. Others who looked impressive won't be anything. That's the way this world works. So, it's a great question. All right. You guys added more. Here we go. Okay. I'll try to pick up the pace. 1130! Oh gosh. All right. End of questions for this week. I'm... There we go. Okay. Matthew, yes and no. There's a famous quote that says, every man should plant a tree, have a son, and write a book. What are your thoughts on it? I think it's a great quote. Moreover, from a Christian perspective, how can one balance temporary things with things that last longer? That's always a question, even in the secular world. You know, you know, do you... You need to, you need to pursue a career to feed your family. But pursuing that career takes you away from the family you're designed to feed. And your children probably need you more than they need your money, but they do need money too. Life is full of those kinds of things. So, I think it's a great quote. You should plant a tree. Why? Because basically you're saying, I'm investing in the future beyond myself. You should have a son. Why? Because that son or daughter is going to teach you more about yourself than any book. It's far more specific. You should write a book. That's a great idea. Or at least you should try. Why? Because again, in some way, all three leave a legacy for the future. And people today who are not having children, children are a gift from God. Do they, but they're like so many other God's gifts. You know, when we give a gift at Christmas, we want something that, you know, people are going to be happy with. It's going to make their life better in a very shallow, consumerist, hedonistic way. Those are the kind of gifts we give. When God gives gifts, no, it's God gives really good gifts. But so often the really good gifts are the ones we look at and say, do I really want that? You know, it's out here. So much of my talk is sort of male oriented. Here's maybe this is male oriented too. Let's say you've been given the gift of beauty. Let's say you're a woman that when you walk down the street, you have all that male attention, which means you can have, you'd probably get any guy you want because guys are just dumb. Guys are just dumb. You know, guys are just so vulnerable to a pretty face. At least to a certain extent, most guys. Is that beauty a gift? Wow. Yes. Is that beauty a curse? I've known beautiful women and they understand the complexities of a really big gift. And yeah, really big gifts are complex. Are you super intelligent? Is that a gift? Yeah. Is a complex gift? Yeah. So trees are good. Suns are very good. Robert answers it. A book is never as good as a sun and often a waste of a good tree. That's a great answer. As a follow up on Matthew's question, how should Christians look at their daily labor? On one hand, maybe stacking shelves or washing dishes might sell us short. On the other, we could spend our whole life trying to find that perfect job. How does a good life and our good labor intersect in your opinion? That's a great question too. It has to be, it's part of the discovery of vocation. And it's very Greek to value work of the mind or work of the words over work of the hands. That's not Hebrew, even though, you know, how many, how many Nobel winners are Jewish? God begins the story. God is a God who gets his hands dirty. And this is the, this is, this is the heaven and earth. This is the meeting of heaven and earth that we find in God in the Hebrew scriptures that you don't find in the Greeks. And so, you know, monks often, you know, they had work of words and work of the mind, but they also had work of the hands. And so we should have both in our lives because they're both good for us. And, and keeping them together keeps heaven and earth connected. So, but in terms of each of us, we have to figure that out. And that's, that's a difficult thing. And again, this is where our affluence and our opportunities are sort of double edged because, you know, I, a hundred years ago, if your father was a farmer, you were a farmer. My father was a minister. My grandfather was a minister. I'm a minister. So it's tough. It's a good question. The magic wagon. Hey, Paul, the question is a bit beyond what I'm able to grasp, but I hope you can catch it. You touched on theosis in your last convo with Boyce, which overlapped with my recent thoughts on evangelism. I believe followers of Christ are to become facsimiles of Christ. That's right. Icons of Christ in his image. And to make facsimiles of him and others. Yes, that's right. To the degree that we can. We are to see, and this is where I think witness is helpful because Jesus, the beginning of the book of Acts says, you will be my witnesses. And, and part of discipleship is in fact making disciples, but God is the one who does most of that work. And that's God, number one and God, number two. I also believe that Christ is the logos, the word of God. Yes. And that followers are invited to participate in his divine nature. Yes. Now again, and I, you know, I've, I've been pleased to get clarification from some Orthodox in this that we will never be God. We should, but there's actually good news in that because what that means is we can spend eternity becoming more like him. And so in that way, our distance become him, our distance from him in a strange way makes us potentially more like him. I know that sounds really mysterious, but it makes sense to me. If Christ followers present the word and are becoming more like the word by knowing the word, to what extent can there, can they be the word? Well, there isn't just the word and, and this is sort of connected to the word. And, and this is sort of connected to the previous question. We Christians believe in resurrection. Jesus is the word made flesh. Resurrected Jesus is the resurrected is the word made resurrected flesh. And we will move towards that. And again, in a weird way, it's the same size. It's the same kind of infinity that early on in my channel, I had a conversation with a, an engineer from Toronto and we talked about algebra and the asymptote. And in a weird way, how does that express infinity? What does mathematically? And so when a show like The Good Place can't imagine eternity with Christ, it's because they can't imagine the infinity of God. And even in our not godness that gives us infinite, infinite, infinite, infinite, that gives us infinite, infinite potential to move towards him. And there is good news in that. Asymptote. And again, I don't know if that makes any sense to you, but it makes sense in my mind. Chad, the alcoholic. Howdy Paul, strange off the topic. Do I ever stay on topic? Have you had an opportunity yet to watch Bo Burnham inside? No, I haven't. And, and, you know, I was looking over these as, as Rick was wrangling everything in this morning and looks interesting. So it looks like it's on Netflix off to check it out. So thanks for the recommendation. I always looking for Netflix is sort of. So much so. So I have this ongoing relationship with my wife around technology. She hates wires, but of course technology. Breeds wires. So during the pandemic, she, one of her goals was to have basically just a TV on the wall. You know, the only cord coming to it being the power cord. Okay. I can do that. That meant cutting the cord and going to streaming TV. And so there's all these different streaming services, but there's that big Netflix button on the remote. So that's, that's where my wife always goes. So I'm always looking for more Netflix stuff that I can watch with my wife and something we can enjoy together. So I'll check this out. Currently enjoying the current season of alone and also watching the first season of alone, which I'd never seen, which is fascinating. I'm really enjoying it because it's like alone for newbies. Hello. Like three people tacked out, you know, tapped out in the first three days. Like, wow. Now, of course, alone is, you know, hardcore survivalists that go out there and they know how to deal with the bear and they know how to deal with the Wolverine. That one season with that guy, you know, where that guy shanked a musk ox. That was amazing. Anyway, zero carton question. I saw Peugeot's recent video with Rafe Kelly and they talked about emergence and emanation, which I'm still not sure how to think about and wanted to see if you had light to shine on it. Does emanation refer to the illuminating spirit, lumination spirit idea in the conscience and having that idea manifest and emergent to the necessity that is that is encompassing the action? Yeah, I think, I think that's part of it, at least to the degree that I understand it. All this was new to me and I got it kind of got thrown into the deep end, sitting between Vervecky and Peugeot because those two start talking and it's, and it's like, what? What? I mean, that one video conversation that those two had, it's like, it's like, man, you know, anybody's going to understand what you two dudes are talking about. You know, you're speaking in tongues and someone's got to interpret. So, you know, sometimes between those two, I do my best of, you know, being the spirit of interpretation between them. And so I feel myself with you in that I'm still trying to get a handle on emergence and emanation. And I, you know, part of why I do my videos and try out these words and get things wrong and then read the comments, because I'll often learn from you about it. Because again, there's lots of smart people out there who watch these videos. And so, you know, if you're just watching my videos and you're not checking through the comments section, you're missing out on about half the good stuff because, boy, some of you people write really great comments. And yeah, I just give it the little heart because I can't, if I, I can't just, because there's different times when I have different abilities to engage with this stuff. And so often I'll just read the comment. I know Mark complained about that. I want this meaty comment. You just got this little heart. It's like, yeah, I don't have time to write meaty responses. So if you're not checking out the comment section on my channel, you're missing probably the smartest stuff of the channel. Because sometimes I read comments and it's like, wow, I learned way more by reading this comment than I learned by doing that video. And so again, this channel for me is a sort of a private gymnasium of, of growth and education. And you all are a part of that. So a rule said to me, you know, basically, you know, emergence is the fudgiest. It's the most fudgy cheating word that a bunch of these naturalists use. And he's got a real point. And just this morning, in fact, I was listening to the latest Peterson conversation with another cognitive science, another cog site guy who I think was a grad student of his for a while. And Peterson used the word emergence. This is an emergent property. It might as well be saying, this is the, this is a property that is the product of a process that we don't understand or might be too complex for our particular understanding or tools to measure. And so you just leaving yourself open to God of the emergent gaps here. But there it is. And again, God of the gaps is much more the gaps between the puzzle pieces sitting on the table, God number one and natural, you know, the reason Newton did theology and the reason early science was wanting to know God more was because they had a thorough understanding of God number one. And I liked how I thought Peugeot's conversation with Rafe, Peugeot was really at his best. And this is where conversations can be really good. And this is, of course, Peugeot, our Verveckis dialogos. And it's what Peterson's been talking about and practicing too lately. And Peterson's talked about that. And I thought his conversation with Michael Malice was good, even though I found Malice frustrating. And if this afternoon, if I have time, I'm going to make another video on that on that conversation because I don't know that I was fair to Malice partly because I don't know enough about him. And a bunch of the people in the comments section know him way better. And so if some people want to make recommendations for particular micro malice, I'm not going to spend a lot of time on him because I'm not I just don't have I'm not tremendously impressed by him. That's not my intuitive take. I may be wrong. I'm app. I'm open to being wrong. But that's my initial take. You know, we all there's always a first impression. And the first impression is always do I want to know this person more or I don't think so. And he's kind of and I don't think so. But sometimes the more you look into someone, the more you see. And so on second opinion, there's maybe more there. So I'm leaving myself open to that. But anyway, emergence emanation. OK, so Peugeot and Rafe Kelly, Rafe Kelly is a really good conversation partner. And you've seen that if you haven't watched, I know a bunch of you just by virtue of the metrics, you know, don't watch some of the conversation videos, which I think in some ways are the sweetest part of the channel that the Freddie and Paul show. But I'm so conflicted about the Freddie and Paul show always have been conflicted about the Freddie and Paul show for certain reasons that I won't go into right here. But those conversations. So Rafe really pulled out good stuff from Jonathan that I think Jonathan wanted to get out of his conversations with like rationality rules and just didn't just didn't work. Conversations and relationships are like that. And Rafe is such a honest Rafe is such a good guy, such a good conversation partner. So I thought Rafe really brought some stuff out of Jonathan in that conversation, which is why I think part of the reason Jonathan posted that on his channel. And I think they'll have more conversations. And, you know, maybe we'll have a four way conversation one of these days. It'll be like tag team wrestling. If Vervey and Kelly and the non theist corner and Vanderklee and Peugeot in the theist corner. Bang! That'd be fun. So maybe someday that'll happen. But watch that conversation because Peugeot is clearer in that conversation than he is often. Rafe really pushes him on some of these things. And Peugeot is able to talk about this and especially emanation. And I talked about that in some of my videos this week when an illustration of it is when Barry Weiss is so Barry Weiss is clearly feeling the loss of the blue church and blue religion and wants to go back there and there's no going back, Barry. I'm sorry. So what she's trying to do and Peterson is too, they're trying to get a handle on the logos of what was good or at least what they see was good of the blue church. And they're looking for words and they're trying things out. Is it identity? Is it? And so you put all of these things out there and they're waiting for emanation. Now, what is that emanation? Is it God alone? No. They're waiting for logos. They're waiting for the word because and Peugeot talked about this nicely, you know, like parkour. Everyone is doing this stuff. And then suddenly everything coalesces around parkour. And the reason I used blue church there is because there's all this stuff that we're looking at. And yeah, you know, Peterson is talking about 1950 to 1995 and Jordan Hall is talking about that. And Jordan Hall, I guess, blue church is a derivation of Menchus mold bugs, the cathedral. So, you know, but that's how we are with logos. And that's how it is with it. But once that logic happens and we have a word, then we continue to work on the word and refine it and distill it. We're sort of like, you know, I have one of my colleagues in Sacramento over the pandemic, got interested in worm composting. And so we're catching up with each other's like he's into worms. Now he says, you know, you put that rind, you put that watermelon rind in with my worms and those little guys go to town. And I used to enjoy taking that head of cabbage and you've got this guinea pig, you put this whole head of cabbage in a cage with two guinea pigs and just like, you just have these little creatures ate that whole head of cabbage. They're going to poop for days. But, you know, it's really cool. And that's what we do with words. Ah, we got the word. And then we're going to test the word and we're going to refine the word. And we're even going to run the word up the hierarchy or it's going to get thrown out in another word. And I'm still there with respect to this ascendant morality. Is it progressive liberationism or, you know, that's of course my word. But anyway, so yeah, so emanation is sort of from above. Bang. Now we see. Emergence is sort of from below. Oh, we feel it, but we can't say it. We can maybe do it, but we can't describe it. And so it's the question of the directionality of the process. So hope that helps. But yeah. So I just wanted to give a shout out to plotness. This language of emanation comes from what's called neo-platinism, which to most people's surprise is something that small orthodox Judaism, orthodox Christianity, and orthodox Islam all agree on and were built up on. So if you want to understand emanation, I highly recommend looking into neo-platinism. Okay, good. Yep. Platinus, who of course is the big guy in neo-platinism. So absolutely. Good. Thank you. See, we're smarter together. Grim Grizz. Can you elaborate a little bit on what that Blue Church is? What did you say? I couldn't hear you. He asked you to elaborate on Blue Church. I, on Blue Church. Oh, Blue Church is Jordan Hall's term. If you type Blue Church Jordan, if you type Blue Church Jordan Hall into YouTube, he did kind of a nice 20 minute video on talking about it. I used, there's like three videos out there on the internet where he talks about it. He writes about it in a Medium article. Blue and, you know, it's so the elements of, you know, red and blue, the Democrats are blue, the Republicans are red. So it's democratic very much on that side. It's a church in that it's a communal sense-making apparatus. And when Jordan Hall uses that, he's using it rightly because in a lot of ways, that's what a church is. Part of what a church is. A church is a communal sense-making apparatus. And that's part of the reason why I'm not surprised that Rebel Wisdom is focusing on trying to maintain a community because their questions are all about sense-making. So Blue Church is, it's, I'll say it this way. One of the chief saints of the Blue Church is FDR. There I just, you know, triggered a whole bunch of you. And it's sort of that, it's the Democratic Party as it's been from the end of the world, the Second World War up until probably 9-11. And it was typified in pre-counterculture, mainline Christianity. You know, just what's happened to mainline Christianity itself is fascinating because mainline Christianity typified Blue Church. And then in the 70s, 80s, 90s, especially now, mainline Christianity has been going woke. And so mainline Protestantism has sort of been a weathervane of the strength of the zeitgeist in American culture. Blue Church is, what's good for GE is good for the nation. Blue Church is television, mass media. We all believe Walter Cronkite. Blue Church is, Blue Church went to war in Vietnam and that was part of its undoing. Blue Church is exemplified by Richard Nixon all the way around in some ways. And you might say, well, Nixon and Trump, yeah, but Nixon resigned. But so you can see the end of Blue Church and its undoing in Nixon, in Watergate, in So Watergate was, you know, breaking into the Democratic offices was very much not Blue Church. Blue Church is undeconstructed Captain America. Blue Church is Superman wearing red, white and blue. The end of Blue Church is the boys. The end of Blue Church is the boys. So that's Blue Church. And so when you listen to Barry Weiss and Jordan Peterson lamenting the fall of Blue Church, and when you look at Michael Malice calling Blue Church Babylon, Babylon has fallen. That's what Michael Malice is doing. You know, he's a prophet. I don't know that he's a worthy prophet of following. I'll leave that up to you to decide. But that's a prophetic aspect to him where he says they're corrupt. Now, when he says they're only corruption, I think that's a little too low resolution. And I think that actually falls into the trap of cynicism. And although he says, you know, he talks against cynicism. So that's Blue Church. But watch Jordan Hall on that. And I think in many ways, when Barry Weiss is talking about what she wants to get back to, Blue Church is New York Times before it went woke. That's a way to say it. Blue Church is Walter Mondale. Jimmy Carter's a little different because he's got some of that evangelical fundamentalism in him and part of that Anabaptist streak in him that, you know, has a weakness to woke. Anabaptists will go woke pretty quickly. Some of them will. And so if you look at, so Jonathan Peugeot, Jonathan Peugeot went to Africa with Mennonite Central Committee. Those details aren't unimportant. You know, in many ways, I am fairly typical IDW because up until a certain point, I was a very reliable democratic voter. And of course, that ticks off a whole bunch of the evangelical and fundamentalist Christians. How could you vote for abortionists? Yeah, Rick is in there raving. Rick's going to walk out on me now. So yeah, yeah, Blue Church. Blue Church. Hey Paul. Yeah. Miles here. I'm in Canada and I've always wondered, in Canada, Honda has a red colored branding. And in the USA, Honda uses a blue colored branding. And yeah, and the strange thing about it, in Canada, red is associated with the liberals, which would be the equivalent of your, more related to your Democrats. And blue is related to conservatives. So it's the, it's sort of the opposite. So Honda, I would theorize must be wanting to appeal to the Blue Church in the USA. And ours equivalent would be the Red Church. Anyway, just an observation. Yeah. Well, it's, you'd have to ask yourself what principality is Honda? Is what's at the top of the Honda principality? Is it making really good small engines? Or probably what you're, what we're listening to are the marketing companies that are, you know, and they're asking the question, who's got more money? Now, boy, this stuff. This is wild stuff, but thanks for that. That's really cool. All right. Grim Grizz. Oh, go ahead. Grim Grizz. Do we have to look to Adam for the role of male in the family? Since Jesus was all abandoned and everyone, abandoned everyone and follow me. Deep down, I'm really asking because of the way you normalize backseating control over what plays through the devil's back screen altar in your home in order to maintain familiar relationship with secular people. Questions like this, Grim, may make me shut down my channel. I said the beginning is about good questions. No, that's good. It's okay. Even if you don't address the political associations of the money behind Netflix, one could look at such as what did they, what they did to Sabrina, the teenage witch and wonders if financial supporting this something a father man should do without closer consideration. Would you speak, please speak on the Christian father's role in the home? Do I need to translate it into English? I can't. I'm sorry. I think I understand what you're asking. If you want to take another shot at it, that's fine. But basically what you're saying is what I hear you saying is you should be, you should be something of the demanding father. Mitch Peterson talks about that archetype quite a bit. And you should lay down the line and say, well, lay down the line and say no TV in this house, because in terms of my Dutch tradition, that was the thing. Let's cut out the worldly amusement. We're just going to read books, but stuff can sneak in in books. So there's a question about, and this is so this gets into the question of the antithesis, which in the Christian reform tradition has been a big deal. Partly because in, and you've heard me mention this guy's name before, Abram Kuyper. Abram Kuyper was a polymath. He founded a university, established a newspaper, became prime minister of the Netherlands. He led a purifying movement out of the state church, which bonded with an old one to become something like the Christian reform church and whose ancestors settled. What's really weird about Abram Kuyper is that both sides of the Christian reform church appeal to him. He was both the kind of guy who would say, we need to see movies so we can do cultural exegesis on them. And another part of him would be like, you need to destroy television because it's of the devil. So there's a purity question here, which is I'm not going to spend money on anything that supports ideas and habits I don't agree with. Then I should really own my own. I should really grow my own food, which would be a great thing. But then can I use American dollars to buy the farm? I need to grow my own food. What's interesting is that these purity cultures, there's a dynamic to purity that the woke are purists and anarchists on the other end are purists. And so when I talked about secularity in my video, secularity is sort of a bright cloud. It's bright because it's a product of Christianity. It's a cloud because it's not pure Christianity. And we sort of need that cloud or we're going to fry in the sun because we're not as pure as Christianity. So yeah, there's a lot of things in my life that you might look at and say a Christian minister shouldn't do. Some are going to look at me and say, how could you have ever voted for Democrats? Some are going to look at me and say, why did you ever vote? How could you ever vote for anybody but a Democrat? So I don't know, Grim, what do you think? What's going on with this question? I'd like to redirect. We're almost at Father's Day and back to the front of the question. It's like, do we look to what God told Adam to do, to how to do your family life? Because Jesus doesn't really give you an example for family life. Yeah, that's a good question. And the question is actually a very Protestant question because in some ways, Protestants replace the monastery with the family. And that feeds into your question because if you want to make the home a monastery, that has implications too. So your question is, where do we find examples for biblical fatherhood or godly fatherhood? Because, see, and I would argue you can find it in Jesus even though he wasn't a biological father, and I would argue that because it was Jesus who pointed us to our Heavenly Father. You can find the beginnings of Jesus really turning up the volume on the family metaphor in terms of our relationship to God the Father in the book of Hosea, let's say, where there's just this beautiful pathos of Ephraim, Ephraim, my son, my son. And in the Hebrew prophets, Israel is both God's son and God's wife. Now again, that's a little weird to think about, but that's the way metaphors work. So I would argue that you're not going to find your example with Jesus, but you will learn about fatherhood via our Father in Heaven by Jesus being a son. Also, there's mapping of the disciple, there's mapping of the master-disciple relationship and the father-son relationship. So part of the Bible is a very strange book for us in that we all tend to like in the Dutch Reformed tradition, exemplarish, which I don't know what Dutch word they bushered in made English, but exemplarish preaching was always sort of a bad word in this Dutch Reformed tradition I inherited. And the reason it was is because my religious tradition understood that the Bible is not fundamentally a book of examples to mimic. There are almost no healthy families in the Bible. Was Abraham a good father? Oh my goodness. Was Isaac? No. Was Jacob? No. Was Joseph? Hard to tell, didn't see much. Was Samuel? No. Was Job? Oh, that's a complex one. Was Saul? Saul seemed to raise a pretty good son, Jonathan. Was David a good father? No. Can we find a good father in the Bible? Jesus seems to leverage that we have an idea of what a good father is, and then he goes on to imagine, to help us see him as son to his heavenly father. Now we can pull in the new atheists and say what kind of father would allow his son to be crucified, and that question is brought to us with a fervor from Islam. So if you're looking for an example, you're probably not going to find one in the Bible, but that doesn't mean the Bible doesn't teach on what a good father is. And my guess is if you really want to look, one of the better places to look is probably the book of Proverbs, because the book of Proverbs seems to be a manual written by a father to sons about what it means to be a man. This is where Christianity, the New Testament modulates the Old Covenant in some peculiar ways, and so I would say sort of take the book of Proverbs, and listen to Jesus about speaking between the lines about fatherhood. There's my best shot of an answer right now. I don't consider myself a particularly good father. I see people who, Christians and non-Christians, I think I've been far better fathers than I've been, Christians and non-Christians, I think I've been far better fathers than I've been. When I think about my own father, I don't think he would have said, in fact, I know he wouldn't have said he was a particularly good father, because I think towards the end of his life, or at least after we kids were out of the house, he had some real regrets about the way that he parented, and in a lot of ways fatherhood is more caught than taught, and so I don't want to necessarily pass the buck, but I think some of my deficiencies in fatherhood were caught from my father. But if you ask me about my father, there are other ways in which he taught me a tremendous amount, and he didn't teach it directly, but he modeled it, and that's why whenever I get this fatherhood question from people about how they can be a good father, I always say, be the person you want your child to grow up into, because this direct instruction channel that we as a culture have all this faith in, we shouldn't have anywhere near as much faith in it as we have. It's important, and it's very Protestant, it's very preacherly, but especially for children, it in no way compares to the capacity of children to create a first draft from who they see their parents as being, and I think there's actually a lot of wisdom built into that, because a child growing up will look at other people's fathers and sometimes think, I wish I had that father and not my father, and even though whatever you think of that line that a child may or may not use, well, what that shows is a capacity in the child to discern something more than the child can know, and upon further reflection, the child might reconsider a take like that, but yeah. So in an exemplarish way, the Bible will not just sort of say, here's the ideal of fatherhood, you can find him in this book of the Bible and do like that person. The Bible teaches, doesn't teach a lot that way. If you're looking for that kind of thing, read the book of Proverbs and listen carefully to how Jesus talks, but no, Jesus, to the best of our knowledge, was never a biological father, and the little three years of ministry we have from him, it's amazing we get as much as we can from that little thin slice. So I don't know if that helps at all, Grim. That helps a lot. This is the internet, you're going to get a hard time, but let me say that you're clearly a good father in several of the very important ways, such as the type that you could call after a really bad night without being scared of what would happen to. So don't be too hard on yourself, the internet will take care of that for you, and thanks for all you do. Thanks, Grim. I appreciate it, and I, even though I don't hold myself up as an example of fatherhood, I'm certainly not as bad of a father as I could have been, and I am regularly filled with gratitude at what I see in my children, and I have to give their mother a tremendous amount of credit. My wife has been a tremendous mother to my children, and I think between the two of us, they got something, and my children, every single one of them, every single one of them, all five of them, are, there are days, part of what's been good about this, the fact that my children aren't married yet, which hopefully in coming years they will remedy, the fact that my children aren't parents yet, hopefully after marriage in coming years they will remedy, is they're all amazing people, and that can be really glib, and part of me is I'm just a proud father, but they're really tremendous kids, and I've been blessed by them, and I love relating to them now as young adults, but I loved having kids too. Kids, if, you know, you're going to pass through this dispensation one way or another, if you get a chance to be a father or mother, take it. It's one of the great adventures of life, and if you get the chance to have definitely more than one, more than two, I think three is a minimum. More than three is great too, but it gets really expensive, and it gets really hard. Parenting is one of the great adventures of life. People are burning through their 20s too. Don't waste your 20s. So anyway, so here we are. I think we're out of time. Are we out of time, Rick? Rick says we're out of time. We're out of time. So thank you for your questions. I really like the back and forth this week. Again, part of why doing this on Discord I think is better than doing it on something like Snapchat, or something like that, something like the way questions and answers are often done is because, you know, earlier the contributions from many of you via voice, I can't do by myself, and you can, and together we're way smarter than we are alone. So thanks for watching. Scheduling might be a little haphazard this summer. I'm going to have to, I'm going to try and figure out with Rick how to give better signals, maybe post however YouTube does it so that, you know, I noticed that Peugeot posts days before he does his Q&A so that if you're subscribed to his channel, you can anticipate when it's going to be. And so scheduling might be a little haphazard this summer just because, again, as I said at the beginning of this, that because I'm a pastor, because my wife is a school teacher during the school year, we don't really get a weekend. I get to have an overnight. So I'm going to try and be taking some weekends. Some of them might be Friday, Saturday, so I'll have to reschedule this. And I'm also going to try and catch up on some vacation that I didn't take during COVID. So yeah, so scheduling will be haphazard. But if you're watching this on YouTube, there's an, there'll be an audio version of this on the, there's almost always an audio version of my YouTube content, which is on my audio podcast, which is commercial free. If you like that sort of thing, there's a copy of this on Odyssey or library. You can find a link to that below in the notes on most of the regular content that we have here. And there's no commercials in that. If you, so that's the channel. And if you want to be involved at a deeper level in the conversation, join the Bridges of Meaning Discord. So thank you all for gathering. Rick, you can end transmission. Thank you.