https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Oywk1BCnIVc

 Hi, this is Paul. I've been working my sources. A number of you have been sending me eyewitness accounts of the Vancouver, especially the first Vancouver talk. I've been reading reports on Reddit, so on and so forth, and had a couple of conversations with, I've had a number of ongoing conversations with a number of you via email or sometimes Skype and this, usually brief conversations, and my watchers are keep pushing me. And so one of the questions I was talking with someone this morning was someone who actually went to the events in Vancouver. Why do we do these events? Why do we listen? What's going on with them? Well, one of the things that I mentioned to the friend I was talking to is that status binds and blinds. And we're not expecting to see either Sam Harris or Jordan Peterson flip on stage. They have a large following with generates and rewards. The ego, there are financial rewards. You're not going to flip in front of a theater of your adoring fans, and everyone wants to see the other side flip. And that's sort of the sport of it. And we talked about the fact that according to this individual that was at the first event in Vancouver, Sam Harris's demeanor was kind of relaxed and comfortable, and he just had his arguments ready, lined up, and it was kind of a tower defense game. Jordan Peterson comes out, boom, hit that argument. Boom, hit that argument. Jordan Peterson seemed much more engaged. And I think this is something that we've seen in Jordan Peterson. I think partly this is a function because he's been in the, he hasn't been in the game as long, and he's had so many years outside of the game. And as I often say about YouTube, YouTube is a place for people who have very little to lose. And so Jordan Peterson in that way is kind of an anomaly. Sam Harris came into this game much earlier in life. He has a lot more to lose in terms of status. And so just in terms of that dynamic, we'll see fewer things. Well, there's less chance that he'll flip on much of anything, or evolve on too much. But people do flip, and people do evolve. Late in life, some people who have been long-term atheists become theists. Some people who've been long-term theists become atheists. This flipping does happen. But what happens is that the higher up you get up the hierarchy, the more status you accumulate, those all become pressures holding you to your position. And so in that way, it's kind of nice to talk about to people like me who are far lower status. And I know you're watching me through YouTube, and there's funny tricks in your mind that I somehow am a celebrity. If you visit my church once, you'll be immediately disavowed of that, because it is not the case that my church is busting up the seams and people are waiting in line. I have a rather unusual queue in my email, perhaps, and in my Facebook page, and a few more Twitter followers. But for the most part, I am not really anything special in this conversation. Now, the Naturalist Materialist framework, its faults have been known for at least 100 years, and its faults have been exposed for at least 100 years. And if you go back and read the conversations, a lot of the arguments are old, and I've trotted out a lot of these very old arguments. Now, what's interesting again is that we're expecting people to flip. Well, people don't necessarily flip. This isn't how people work, and this, in fact, I think is part of the weakness of the kind of the Sam Harris approach to this, because it assumes that if I get the right evidence, I'll flip. Well, I am not quite that rational. I have committed biases through and through me, and I am hardly just someone looking at evidence and doing math and saying, he has 20 points, he has 15 points, therefore I'll side with him. Our lives are enormously more complicated. We're embedded in families, we're embedded in cultures, we're embedded in jobs, we're embedded in religion, we're embedded in all of these things, and these things keep us sticky. In my last video where I talked about the, I should go look at that Oneida book, but they talked about they didn't want sticky relationships in the commune because they wanted the great leader of the commune to make rational decisions based on, well, you and you, you should make a child because that child will have the best of your quality and the best of this quality, and so on and so forth. But people aren't that way, and this is, in a sense, part of the difference between economically communist central planning and our faith in the marketplace. Part of what the West has brought to the table in terms of these conversations has been saying, look, the market is far more complex than any single one of us, even with computers, can manage. Therefore, we're better off riding the elephant even if we can't finally control it and trying to do a little bit of adjustment, the elephant in this case being the marketplace, because in some senses, the inbuilt chaos and order that the living elephant or a well-functioning marketplace produces, even though there are dramatic downsides to it, such as inequality, poverty, so on and so forth, in the long run, it's better. And so you hear people having the economic argument that capitalism actually performs better in terms of lifting people out of poverty than communism, and you can look at the history of mainland China for that conversation that capitalism has been far more successful, but of course, there are costs to it. But the naturalist materialist paradigm has remained the dominant paradigm in the public order in the West. It is dominant in the academy, it is dominant in the political sphere of the capitalist democracies in the West, and it was dominant in the former Soviet, in the former communist world. Now, here's where this begins to evolve and slip, because I think in a sense, Peterson is enough of a naturalist materialist that he's watching, and naturalism material is only one aspect of that very, of our very complex culture, of this very complex culture, and what we see happening is that this naturalist materialist agnostic atheistic context that has prioritized facts and evidence and science over persons and personalities and woo, we see this slipping, and we see this, we see Jonathan Haidt, for example, sounding the alarm that, hey, we're going to lose some of the objectivity that we have enjoyed within that system if we decide that we're not going to take a look at race and IQ, and we're not going to look at biological sex and gender expression. We're not going to talk about these things scientifically because they raise what becomes functionally religious problems, and in that sense, why do Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris, why are they have so much alignment in this particular fight? Because they're both, in a sense, they have a great deal more commonality here, but they're looking at the other side and they're saying, I see a religion developing, and of course, Sam Harris, a religion! It's kind of a mouse and an elephant. Oh, it's a religion, and Jordan Peterson saying, oh, I've been looking at religion, I've been studying religion. This is a religion, but this is a new one, and this is a threatening one, and this one could threaten the whole system. Even though Peterson has mostly been attacking Marxism, there's wisps of this other things, and you hear it when Peterson makes the comment to the Sam Harris types when he says, hey, look, you know what, when Peterson, when people lose their, when people give up their religion, they tend to just grab a new one under the covers and work that, and that will be the secret, sacred self. Now, again, Thomas Nagel, and I keep mentioning Thomas Nagel, and you should probably look him up on the weekly standard if you're looking for a short thing on the heretic or a much longer treatment, obviously, mind and cosmos. Thomas Nagel comes around and says, okay, let's call it on materialist naturalism, because philosophically, the corpse is starting to stink, and the decay is starting to show. Now, that might not show at a popular level because there's a drag, but at the philosophical level, it's bankrupt, and a lot of people know it. We've gained extraordinary power and success by colonizing. In other words, by reason colonizing nature. Remember C.S. Lewis wrote in the 50s, in the 40s and 50s, he developed these arguments, and they're already half a decade, half a century old, and so we've gained tremendous power over the physical layer of our world, and we have impressed ourselves by this power, and we are for the most part happy with this transactions, and we always tend to moderate them. It's no mystery that national parks came about as, in a sense, a compensating response to our increased colonization of nature. We began to mourn the mother that we had been colonizing. It's in a sense, we go over to the slave quarters to look at mom and thinking, boy, mom isn't looking so good. We've really been using mom hard, and well, let's cut out a little place over in Yellowstone and Yosemite and maybe a few other places where mom can get a breather. Well, and now here at the end of the 20th, beginning of the 21st century, the health of mom is in a pretty dramatic panic because we're realizing that if mom goes, we all might go because mom is at least half of us. So, you know, Thomas Nagel is getting into this. This naturalism, materialism, this approach to the physical world has been enormously fruitful, but it has also had dramatic costs, and we're not so sure, our watchers are not so sure, that keeping up this approach with mom will really do good things long term. In a sense, maybe we should stop colonizing mom quite so hard and give her a little bit more time off to breathe. So, in the 20th century, we saw the bitter fruits of that, and we're not going, and now Nagel comes along and says part of the problem is the mind, and Peterson makes the same point in Transliminal 2015, that we gained, we were able to colonize by reducing the mind and imagining the monarchical vision of taking out persons and stripping nature down into a space for objects and looking at things in a Newtonian fashion, and it worked really powerfully and it worked really well, but Nagel comes along and says you can't just insert mind back into the system, and I think probably the best way to understand Sam Harris is this is what he's trying to do, but you almost get the sense with Sam Harris that, so you've got this big old book of nature, and we're going to set mind on top, or we're going to set mind next to it, but you're not really integrating these books very well, that isn't really happening, and that's at least what Thomas Nagel says. Now, Nagel says, you know, theism was the older system, and the advantage that theism had was mind was already integrated from the start, but he notes Thomas Nagel is an atheist, and he's, I've used the quote before where he doesn't want to be a theist, he doesn't want there to be a god, so now we're knocking on Augustine's door and talking about desire, and the heart wants what it wants, Woody Allen. The foundational mind, and here's the thing, we inherit mind from our father, our father in heaven, or we are given mind from the gods via the Greeks, or I'm sure the Hindus and most cultures have mythologies that talk about how we got conscious and how we got powerful, and how you have the gods, you have nature, and we're kind of in the middle space, and in fact the Genesis story has God and nature and us, and now you read the book of Hebrews, we're a little lower than the angels, so you know, you've got another layer of what missionaries have been talking about, the excluded middle layer, but the foundational mind, which is God, had claims on the derivative mind, who are us, and the cost was loss of freedom and autonomy, and this is in fact in many ways the central struggle of Genesis 3. The man and the woman are placed in the garden, and they're told, go ahead and make culture, and they begin to think, well, maybe I'd like to go up a level, and maybe God is being withholding, and that's essentially what the serpent suggests to them, and they in a sense say what the son of Luke 15 says to God, says, you know, I really want your stuff, but I don't want you, and in many ways the materialist atheist layer says to, at least this is Altheus here, of course, says to God, we want your stuff, and we don't want you, we want to be autonomous, we want to call the shots, we want to be able to pursue what we want, and we don't need any stinking old stories, or old man in the sky, or flying spaghetti monster, hassling us with your archaic rules, will be the judge of whether things work. Now obviously right there, you know, well slavery worked well for the master, sort of, slavery didn't work well for the slave, and so work is also attached to the mind because you're not going to segregate work from want, and in fact a contemporary adaptation of modern language, someone invites you to a dinner, or someone asks you to do something, and you say, well that doesn't work for me, and that's a nice social way of saying, ah no, but I don't want to say no, because I don't want to rupture the relationship, so that doesn't work for me, and in a sense what naturalists say is that, okay, we like the stuff, we're not, you know, now we have a, at least we have a cover story about how all this stuff came about without you, that was Darwin's big addition, so even if, even if some of the best chemists say, no we really don't have any idea how, how prebiotic life could become bio, you know, biochemistry, we have no idea how that would happen, but now we have a cover story, okay, so we don't want you, we'll take the stuff, we seem to work well without you, when we cut down Odin's tree, Odin didn't complain, when I left the church and stopped praying to God, the world didn't end, okay, so maybe you always were a fiction of my imagination, oh yeah, Freud, Freud says, these are deep things inside of me that I'm just projecting up, so, you know, I can probably, I can probably lose you God, I want your stuff, I don't want you, so Nagel wants to find a new system with mind already incorporated within it that also affords the autonomy that materialism seemed to promise, and that's Thomas Nagel's goal, that's a very demanding goal, because again, as Nagel said, it seems that we derived all of these benefits of the scientific revolution and the industrial revolution and, you know, all of the world transforming revolutions we've had without mind, reintroducing mind suddenly, and suddenly it opens us up to problems, and we don't want to lose what we've gained, and in a sense, this isn't so different from Peterson, we don't want to lose what we've gained, and so of course, the argument of if it ain't broke, don't fix it, let's just keep going with our project, but now I would say that communally, all of our minds and all of our watchers are always responding to this in ways that the elephants are responding in ways that the writers don't know, and we just keep making up stories, and a lot is happening, and I think this is part of the reintroduction of the secret, sacred self, so the naturalist, materialist, and mind autonomy problem, once you result, once you remove the divine mind and its claims, you are left with other human minds, and that's part of the problem. They are in some ways more problematic, because there are, that should be many of them, not may of them, now here's the thing with God, God is not only all-powerful and all-knowing, but he's all-good, and that gives a degree of comfort, so that when you're feeling a little ignorant, because you're not all-knowing, and if you're feeling a little weak, because you're not all-powerful, you can rely on him being all-good, and that, oh that's the phone, so in one sense, the problem with God is that he's so big and so powerful and so public, and has such a following, even though the followers don't always agree, the upside to God is that at least theoretically he's all-good, so when things are going poorly, I can at least default to that, so what happens now is that when you're trying to reintroduce mind into the system, you swap power and authority, which is God, for plurality, and now we get into the fun question, would you rather fight one million, um, a one million pound human, which would be God, or one million, or a million one pound humans, which is all the rest of them, and that is in a sense the conundrum between a monolithic, monarchical monotheism that has an all-powerful and all-knowing and all-good God versus eight billion secret, sacred selves, now they're all little, and not any one of them is quite as powerful as God, they tend to get into hierarchies, and they build institutions that magnify their power, and then we're going to talk about the state in a little while, because there's no bigger institution than governments, theists resolve this issue by authority and submission, theists submit to the God, now they fight with other theists, so the problem doesn't go away, but theoretically, that's how they solve the problem, and this brings us to an impasse, which is what to do with inconvenient people, now with all of the news of immigration, with the talk of children being separated from their families, you've got boats in the Mediterranean that the Italian government doesn't want to let in, you've got Turkey going increasingly authoritarian, and the European Union not wanting to say anything because they're holding three million Syrian refugees, and all Turkey has to do is say, oh, you're going to criticize us, why don't we send three million Syrian refugees your way, Germany's kind of choking hard on one million, how about we add another three million, and we see how you do, and so the European Union says, we'll shut up about Turkey, we'll let Erdogan do his own thing, we'll sacrifice some of our values that we like to talk a lot about and celebrate and celebrate ourselves through them for not having those other three million refugees, and this is one of the points that Yuval Harari keeps making in his books, that the future, what we're really going to be dealing with is inconvenient people. In Europe, do they bring alien culture and religion, and that's part of the conversation, you know, what are you going to do, in Europe you've got Africans, many of whom are Muslims coming up, and you've got Muslims from the Middle East and Pakistan and Iran and Iraq and Syria, and right into the heart of decaying Christendom, and how does that go, and then suddenly everyone was all irreligious and able to be nice to religious people when all the religious people were Christians, when in many ways you're just kind of like, in some ways you're a nominal Christian who's no longer practicing, well now you've got a whole bunch of Muslims, and again, when you listen to the Peterson Sam Harris talk, this is something that's huge with Sam Harris, and is there with Peterson too, where it's like, yeah, Christianity, well, we're kind of used to dealing with Christians, I might find a church a little annoying and I might find Christians a little annoying, but boy, once I have to deal with Muslims, I'd rather deal with Christians, because at least I know where they're coming from, and I know that they're coming from Muslims, because at least I know where they're coming from, and they've had the Protestant Reformation, and yeah, maybe the Republicans get a little theocratic, but those are theocratics that I can at least deal with, that kind of Christian-y civil religion has been around a long time in the United States, and was of course a big part of what we use to fight the Cold War. So what do you do with inconvenient people? Control? Well, people are really difficult to control because they're really smart, and they group up very quickly if you try to get authoritarian on them, and they might not be able to agree upon what the new government will be after they tear yours down, but they can sure get together to tear it down, and we've seen that again and again, again, my reference to the who, here's the new boss, same as the old boss. So what happens is you have this motivation to objectify people, and if you look at all of the gains made by the materialist, naturalist conception that we have used to employ to create science and technology, and our current regimes of politics, they're deep within this, why do we want to study psychology? Well, we want to help people, but at the same time we also want to help them be as we think they should be, and this is why on one level a therapist wants to help you, but this is why Christians often look for Christian therapists, because Christian will say, well I want to be shaped in the way that Christ say I should be, and a secular therapist, whether or not they own up to things has their own framework, and ironically, functionally, many secular therapists have a framework that is a lot like Sam Harris's framework. In other words, are you feeling better? Well, if you go back to the 90s and you look at the great show The Sopranos, they were flirting with those ideas, because Tony Soprano goes to a therapist and says, Dr. Melfi, these panic attacks are getting in the way of my mob bossing, and if you could really help me get away from all this anxiety, I could be a better mob boss, I could be more successful with my syndicate crime family, and suddenly she's like, well do I really want to make him a better mob boss? And suddenly her moral ideas are starting to come in, and then suddenly you have to ask yourself, well where do my moral ideas come from? Now she was also Italian, and so then Roman Catholicism came into the picture, but also secularism. In other words, and this is a big part of Peterson's point with Sam Harris, and a point of my last couple videos, this imagined clean room morality looks way too much like decaying Christendom or late stage Christendom to really have me buy that you have surgically removed all the vestiges of Jesus Christ and the Old Testament than you seem to be telling me. I'm not buying it, and the reason I'm not buying it is I know what other systems look like, and you and I are so close together. And this isn't a new problem. In many ways, Jesus is in the New Testament at odds with the Pharisees, and if you look at the spectrum of the culture war in Jesus' time, the Pharisees are his closest allies, and this is a common human dynamic. You work in the Dominican Republic. Dominicans have a harder time working with Haitians than North Americans or even Puerto Ricans. Why? Because the Dominicans and Haitians are right there, and this is why other countries will tend to criticize close neighbors, and this is why this is kind of the antagonism that develops over familiarity. You've got a million tiny little friction points between someone's close to you. Someone who's over here, you might only have one or two. So what do you do with inconvenient people? Well, the emergent political paradigm and the emergent paradigm in the academy is not only some implicit Marxism, but is a lot of the secret self. Now, again, David Brooks' book, The Road to Character, is a fun book. If you like biographies, he's got plenty of little ones in there, but the point he's making is that he's trying to make it so that people can understand what it is that's going on. And there's a lot of little ones in there, but the point he's making is the negotiation between Adam 1 and Adam 2. Adam 1 are the resume virtues, and Adam 2 are the eulogy virtues. And in pre-911 Christianist America, the greatest generation that fought World War II, there was a lot of Christianity in that system, whether or not because we wanted the Lord to fight communism, kind of in the same way that the Avengers wanted Thor to help fight Thanos. So this is a big deal, and the cult of the sacred self is an attempt to integrate these tensions. Now, someone asked me again about the fairness of saying Matt Dillahunty and Sam Harris are Christians. Part of the difficulty of running that formula is that by the early 21st century, there's so many historical elements in the river that to say this one is really turning your dials beneath the surface. You have how much Greece is there, and how much Athens is there, and how much Jerusalem is there in Sam Harris. And so Jordan Peterson kind of wants to wade in and say, there's some Jerusalem, there's some Jerusalem, there's some Jerusalem. And Sam Harris says, no, it's all Athens, thank you very much. And a lot of us watch and say, there's plenty of Jerusalem and Athens and Thor and your mom and all of this stuff within our constructed selves. And so in a sense saying, there's vegetables in your stew, and there's beef in your stew, well, there's beef and vegetables in the stew. And they've all been in there for a long time. And so, you know, if you really want to be a very particular vegan, you're going to have to cook the stew new. And at this point, there's no cooking a new stew. And that's part of what Peterson has on his side in this argument. There's no recooking the stew. And you can see that even with the small experiments, like I noted in a video a couple back with the people trying to go to Mars. Well, yeah, we've had mom in the slave corner so long, we've been working her so hard, we've colonized her so hard for so long that now we're nervous about her death. Well, yeah, go to Mars and see how that works. There are ways that we are dependent on ideas and systems that we are completely unaware of. And that's part of the reason we are not transparent to ourselves. So you have the secret sacred self. And this is supposed to help us. This is, in a sense, the new paradigm. This is the ascendant morality. The secret sacred self tries to resolve the theism, naturalist materialism things. In a sense, it tries to bring mind back in. And of course, this is where Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris can look at the New Agers and say, I'm not buying any of that. That's way too much woo. Well, what is the woo? The woo is trying to reintegrate mind into material. The woo is magic. The woo is, that's essentially it. And I hadn't heard this woo term until I started going into all this and then going into all this and then listening to Jordan Peterson and lately with the one fighter video that I mentioned in a few videos back. Well, what is woo? Woo is the attempt to reintroduce the mind back into the material world. And many of us, someone asks, oh, so your church is a quarter million people. That's not my local church, by the way. That is the Christian Reformed denomination in the United States and Canada. It's about a quarter million people. And the question was in the comments, you know, are they secular humanists? And I said, most of them, a lot more than they want to admit, myself included. And one of the ongoing playful tensions I have with my sister and a lot of other people in my life who are a little bit new at more new agey and post Christian is I look at them and I say, you've got way too woo, way too much woo in your life. Well, they don't like that. And I didn't have those words before. But again, this woo is the reintroduction of mind into material. So for example, after my father died, my niece who was driving his old car, the locks freaked out and, you know, stop it, grandpa, stop playing with the locks. And a bunch of other weird technology things happen. This is where we get into the ghost conversation. And, you know, the ghosts and woo are way too close for most secular humanists to admit to or to like. And so one way in a sense to navigate the, so C.S. Lewis, for example, is very modernist. He's very Platonist. And one of the things that, again, if you're a theist, you've got mind integrated into your system and it's always been there. So when C.S. Lewis converted to Christianity, a big part of why I think his books are seen as being so helpful in the West is he is working on reintegrating woo, reintegrating mind into the rest of it in a way that doesn't trip our woo alarms. Okay. So this is where I think, again, if Peterson and Peterson, the thing that makes Sam Harris and his tribe, his followers, very nervous about Jordan Peterson is they're really hoping that woo doesn't sneak in. You know, maybe it's woo poo or something. So that woo poo doesn't sneak in because, you know, you've got stories, you've got mind that woo's going to sneak in. Well, with the secret sacred self, it's all over. It's woo all the time. And so you deal with theism by making myself God. Namaste. The God in me sees the God in you. We're all God. Okay. Well, that's kind of one way to deal with pluralism, but whose God is stronger. And everything is one. Therefore, none of us are in competition with each other. And most of us sit back and watch that and think, hey, you know what? I'm not quite so sure we're going to get rid of these hierarchies. So again, when you think about Jordan Peterson is kind of barking at, you've got postmodernity that says there can't be a narrative. And then Marxism sneaks in underneath. And Jordan Peterson is sort of like the guard dog who's barking, ah, Marxism. Don't let the Marxist in. Well, another thing that's sneaking in underneath is woo. And that's in a sense what Sam Harris is barking at. Don't let the woo in. And Peterson's like, maybe we could use a little woo. And Thomas Nagel says, we ought to come to terms with our lack of woo. And Sam Harris says, says, no woo, no woo. I can't take any woo. Okay. And so the secret, sacred self people are like, hey, man, go with the woo. The woo is great. And Harris and Peterson look at that coming into the university and they're both barking for slightly different reasons. So what the secret, sacred self relies on is polytheism. And it's kind of hyper polytheism because not only are there multiple gods, everything is god and we're all god. But that also requires kind of a functional libertarianism where, you know, you do you, I'll do me. And that also is deep in our culture. And again, if you look at, if you look at Harari and, well, not Harari actually, but Scott Alexander and the article that I posted on the West two videos ago, how does what Scott Alexander calls universal culture work with us? It's because we allow quite a bit of individual autonomy. And you see, this is not new. This has been built into, let's say, the separation of church and state that has been the American experiment in the federal government for over 200 years. And the idea is I can be a Christian, you can be a Muslim, you can love woo, you can hate God. We can all do this and we can all be Americans together. Well, how does that work? We need to all revolve around something. Take again, a look again at Jonathan Heights, the rationalist, the rationalist, someone will put it in the comment section, the rationalist, basically the rationalist illusion. No, you got to circle around something. And so you've got the Iwo Jima statue and we circle around the flagpole. And when Christians go out and pray by the flagpole as someone who was hyper about civil religion back during the Cold War, it's like, is that really where you want to pray? Well, now we're getting into a bunch of U.S. political things. So the secret, sacred self people resolve the story moment problem by they're not just a secret, sacred self. The self is a story, which I think is true. And they are the hero of their own story. And this is the woo business that I can be at home and I can work my woo. And nobody in the world quite understands the world like I do. And, you know, God bless them. We're all God and we're all one, but I'm a little bit more God than them. And I'm a little bit more in touch with my godness than they are. And my godness is a little bit more in touch. And now most of us listening will say, this just sounds like, you know, self-centered bias than anything else that and Christians play in this too. You know, when I get to the pearly gates, you know, God is going to be like, oh, here comes Paul VanderKlay. Open the gates wide and let him come in instead of saying, hey, Paul, look what you did with your life. Look at all these ways you messed it up. It's my inner Calvinist in me saying, yeah, don't get too impressed with yourself. Difficulties remain, however, for the secret sacred self. The individual sacred self is materially dependent upon the state. And I've seen this often. Again, I live in Northern California. I have friends that, you know, I don't want to make, I don't want to, I don't want to make money. Well, soon as they don't have money, making money sounds like a whole lot better deal. I'd really love to have the state take care of me or I'd like to have someone else take care of me. And just as you have prosperity gospel and Christianity, you got a lot of prosperity gospel in the new age moment. You know, I'm going to use the law of attraction and I am going to draw to myself wealth and abundance. And pretty soon we're up there in Oregon with the Bagua. If you haven't watched Wild Wild Country, definitely don't miss it on Netflix. So the individual sacred self is materially dependent upon the state. And a lot of this, again, Harari is good in this and the history of Sapiens, family has been replaced. And family has been replaced by the state. And the state and the market too. And in the West we modulate state and market in different ways than let's say Central Europe or Western Europe from Central Europe, from former communist union, so on and so forth. Family has been replaced. Now family is a source of great tension with the God in me because the people you spar with most of the time are the people you live with because you've got a million things to fight with them over. You also have huge amount of commonality and so the commonality and the difference are always in tension. So, you know, why won't my wife recognize the godly, the godness person that I am? And she's like, I've seen your godness up close and I am not impressed. So, you know, intimate relationships are like this. We not only know each other's glory, we know each other's dirt and we know each other's flaws. And this is what makes marriage such a difficult thing. In the Brett Weinstein video about monogamy, I thought what he had to say about infatuation was dead on. Infatuation is this early mechanism by which we bond very closely with someone else and we get completely enmeshed with that other person, only a few years later to realize, look at what I'm enmeshed with. And well, now you've got a process of differentiation where the other person says, no, you're the problem in my life. No, you're the problem in my life. My life would be great without you. And so, you know, it's five, seven, ten years into the marriage, they get a divorce only to marry a second person who now they've just triggered their infatuation thing and oh, this, as a pastor, I hear this all the time, I found the most perfect person, really. I'll see in a couple years when the perfection wears off and it always does. Well, what happens with the secret, sacred self is that, watch, I'm just terribly impressed with me. I'm a god after all. Well, yeah, you're a god too, but but I'm, I won't tell you this, but I'm really a much better god than you. And so on and on we go with these things. So what happens when you're dependent on family for things like care when you're old, for money when you're old, for paying the rent. So, and then in a sense, what we've done is that the state and the law come in and these mediate these things. Plus we need all this fabulously expensive health care to beat cancer and heart disease when we get older. So you've got physical well-being, health care, retirement. This is why the gender expression individualist issue goes political. In other words, one of the things that people commonly say and is, well, you know, if you want to, if you want to have the gender identity of Shirley Temple, go right ahead. No, but I want the government to pay for my reassignment surgery. And if I'm going to be Shirley Temple, I really do need an adoring fan base. And in other words, these, the secret sacred self not only needs expression, say, okay, you're free to express, dress any way you want to. But now this gets complicated. The secret sacred self is also insecure and it needs affirmation. The government had better reflect my gender identity on my driver's license. So now you can have like male, female, or N, declined to state. Well, that's not really me too. I want on my driver's license, I want Paul VanderKlay, 225 pounds, 54 years old, gender Shirley Temple. That's my gender identity. I'm Shirley Temple. I tap dance. I have a lovely voice. I have adults fawn on me. I'm perpetually seven years old. Why won't the rest of the world comply with that? And so Jordan Peterson will make individual accommodations with people and that's a reasonable thing to do. But when we get into the level of the government, it's not only compelled speech, it's all of us now must conform to whatever the secret sacred self says. So if I decide that my gender pronouns are his highness and I catch you using a gender pronoun other than his highness, I will sue you into oblivion because I had a friend, we had a little basketball league in town here and my friend was kind of running this league and so he was signing kids up and a little kid came up to sign up and what's your name? Da Man. Da Man? Yeah, Da Man. Now my friend is black and the family signing up was black and my friend freaked the heck out because he's like, Da Man is not a good name. So he called the mother over and he read the mother of the riot act about Da Man. What kind of name is Da Man? And you might say, well, why are you such a jerk about, let the person name whoever they want. Yeah, but Da Man, that's pretty mild, but if I decide to name myself John F. Kennedy and then say, well, I was actually born in the 30s, when was John F. Kennedy born? Earlier than that. But if I decide to rename myself John F. Kennedy, okay, call yourself John F. Kennedy and I want to adopt his social security number and I want to adopt his estate and when I walk into the John F. Kennedy library, I want to be treated as John F. Kennedy. Well, suddenly, individual identity means something and in fact, we have a thing called identity theft. Well, how and the state again, modulates all of this stuff. So when the secret sacred self says, you know, I am actually King Cyrus and Cyrus the Great, by the way, and I demand to be treated that way. Well, to what degree does the government capitulate to the secret sacred self? That's really where a lot of our political conversations are at now and that is where the, you know, the Kathy Newman conversation with Jordan Peterson, well, well, you're offending people. Yeah, I should. That's part of our job here. Feelings are not, feelings and skin have two different levels on the hierarchy in terms of protection by the state and it should be that way. So this is why the gender expressive individualist goes political. The state must mediate and affirm. If the state doesn't put Shirley Temple on my driver's license, I'm being oppressed. So you have Jordan Peterson's culture war and he notes that Marxists slide under beneath post-modernity but he pays less attention to the sacred self slide under implicit in the pronoun wars. He does pay some attention to them. I have heard him talk about that but the focus of him has tended to be the Marxist and a good psychologist might sit down and say, well, that's because Jordan Peterson was raised during the Cold War and so he's got a significant amount of post-traumatic stress from the threats induced on his formed self during that period of time. So he's pretty reactive to Russian propaganda which would say, well, that's why he pastes his house with it. Now again, I don't know Jordan Peterson so I'm not trying to be a psychologist but the mind goes these places and it could all be untrue but this is perhaps part of the reason why he's so reactive to Marxism and the secret sacred self is kind of slipping under the radar and he's not paying a lot of attention to it. He himself makes accommodations to individual and accommodation is simply pluralistic form of social lubrication. Now the sacred self in traditional religion, there are obvious often simplistic alignments with Buddhism and Hinduism and this is most clearly seen in the western variants of these and most clearly seen in Sam Harris. So we'll hear Sam Harris kind of pivot in a lot of these conversations and say things about Hinduism and Buddhism. Now what's interesting is that there are some alignments with the secret sacred self that's going on with Sam Harris that I'm not sure Sam Harris has fully exposed within himself. Maybe as a theistic Christian just like Jordan Peterson is reactive to Marxism, perhaps I'm particularly reactive to secret sacred self and if you knew a lot of my, a lot of my, that's probably true. I'll leave it there. So we've all got our soft spots, we've all got our buttons. I, my woo detector that's maybe why I can get along with a lot of atheists because boy I got a woo detector in me and so me and my older sister who I dearly love and we get along fabulously but I continue to tease her and annoy her and so often the annoyance is all over woo and I am probably the most secular person in my family. My mother and my sisters are considerably, at least one of my sisters, considerably more comfortable with woo than I am and we see this played out though in society. Is yoga for physical health or emotional well-being or are you doing it to escape the cycle of reincarnation and eliminate the illusion of the self in your story? Go ahead and search yoga cultural appropriation and you'll get an earful of Indians who look at the skinny white beautiful Americans and their fabulously profitable industry. Now maybe Sam Harris would look at that and say yep they've taken religion out, just make sure you take the statuaries and some of the symbolism and is saying oh religious. Well Sam Harris seems to try to take the woo out of Buddhism and leave his meditation as a practice that gives me experience which I find enjoyable therefore it's safe in my woo free clean room. So here's the thing with my videos I get more ideas as I keep going I might have to retitle this. Now there's the personal versus the impersonal though you see and this is again part of where the secret sacred self gets very interesting because the self rationality a story you are attached to keeps colonizing nature and if everything and everyone else is impersonal if I can see through to the materialist substrate of my wife and children and neighbors and congregants if in fact I can see through to this I think this is part of the the the latent motivation and desire beneath science if I can figure my wife out so completely now there this woman I've been married to for 30 years. Oh boy I'm talking about her she's getting pissed off if she knows I'm talking about her with you people I better shut up but imagine a theoretical wife that I imagine might have been married to for the last 30 years who I probably know her better than any other person in the world and there will be days that I look at her and say do I know you at all and she has exactly the same experience with me and this is not an unusual experience what does that mean and so what is my desire well my desire is to have science and so to make the universe transparent so how can I get my neighbor to do as I want how can I get them to see the world as I see it and now we're knocking on the door of Sauron in Lord of the Rings if everything and everyone else is impersonal the personal keeps colonizing it and appropriating its resources to serve the self in this case the sacred self in theism of course it serves God and this is one of the reason why why theism works better communally than the sacred self there are in every city some church that there they've got some hinduism they've got some buddhism they've got some some atheism they've got some mus they've got some islam they've got a lot of christianity they say all religion is the same and in many cases these are temples to the sacred self but they can't get the kind of communitarian power that christianity can in its little subgroups or islam can in its little subgroups and I think again cue Jonathan Haidt for this conversation because going around the you know circling in the hodge or praying around the flagpole as as the little christians battling bad secularism in their public school that won't let them pray in the locker room or or have the teachers lead in prayer who wants their teacher to lead in prayer any random teacher that's why prayer in public schools to me has never made sense shows how secular I am maybe that's why you're listening to me because I'm a christian pastor but I'm also secular and well that's why I like CS Lewis because I'm trying to integrate my woo so new at new age people can't pull it together and in fact hinduism many would argue is a label given by the british to just a stew a religious stew that is practiced in India and so what western buddhists do with what western buddhists do with buddhism is take out the woo this is woo free it's gluten free woo free and vegan so because Sam Harris and the Russell Brand said well he he fell off the wagon in his in his vegetarianism but he's still no woo please so theism of course has its god and in god everything serves the god again you here you have a hierarchy and when Jordan Peterson says what is god that which is at the top of all the hierarchies and again the the Sam Harris people are going to say no that's not what we mean is there an old man in the sky and Jordan Peterson says oh that's not a terrible representation and you know off and off with you know on and on we go and the christians will say no he's not an old man in the sky pay no attention to the Sistine Chapel so what happens in these systems is that you get avatar which is dances with wolves with aliens and you get Pocahontas and you get dune and you get fern gully and it's all the same because the self keeps colonizing we can't help ourselves and in fact what happens if you really were practicing religious yoga or religious buddhism to the degree that they've been historically practiced well you're going to try in all of your life to eliminate the self to eliminate your story because the story is an illusion and this is part of the reason you've got east and west conflicting here because in a sense what happens is say i really like buddhism i'm going to spend a lot of money decorating my house with a whole lot of heads in fact one of the most one of the one of the sermons that search engines pull up most of the time in my in my queue of blog posts that i've done on sermons is should you put buddha in the bathroom you go into a chic a chic contemporary bathroom and here's this buddha statue and i look at this and i think as a religious person if i walk into your bathroom and i see a big old statue of jesus i think i don't want to pee by my lord you know come on well and so i did a little you know googling what how do buddhas feel about putting buddha in your bathroom as a decorative technique well it's probably not too different from how hindus feel about all these skinny white ladies going to yoga in north america and saying no it's not really religion it's just exercise and they're like oh well see the thing is you have no fear of that in christianity because we're all sitting in chairs maybe there's a little standing and kneeling and you know there's a little bit of nutrition with the bread and the wine but christianity kind of took that stuff out of it read first corinthians and paul on the corinthian church and their feast and how poorly that went according to paul now i think in this in that way we can see sam harris as as late stage materialism harris's attention to meditation his trying to accommodate consciousness these are late stage adaptations i think this is part of the part of the reason why we're going to continue to see not the not the rise of you know the the long anticipated rise of materialism no i think it's i think it's in decline and i think it will still decline you might say well what about what about all the nuns n-o-n-e-s's i'd say yeah they're giving up formal religion and they're skeptical about god but they're probably going to yoga and they're probably playing with meditation they're downloading sam harris's app and they're not going to be quite as reactive to woo as sam harris's i woo is here to stay boys and girls and it just depends on how you integrate your woo boy this is going to be a title so he wants to integrate consciousness and the self into it he i think his watchers without necessarily i think his conscious self is resisting it possibly because of the hierarchy his watchers are seeing what thomas nagel is seeing and say you have to bring the mind back in you have to integrate the mind if you don't integrate the mind we're going to lose the whole thing so well we'll call it mindfulness well yeah but i'm not sure that's integration i think that's kind of like doing white lady yoga resources from buddhism which have become very popular addresses phenomenology which is a philosophical approach to the impasse and so consciousness and materialism in him i think don't aren't well integrated and see what is jordan peterson doing he peterson is trying well if we're going to think along a progressive line peterson is a little further down than harris and i think that's why not unlike the apostle paul peeling off jews from the synagogues in the book of acts where he goes to preach jordan peterson has come into the temple of sam harris and he's peeling off people why do we know this consciously no but our watchers are watching the elephant feels that the riders are getting nervous the riders are beating the elephant harder well what does conversion look like conversion looks like the rider giving up with what the elephant already believes that's conversion so consciousness and materialism him don't seem well integrated again it's almost like two books on a shelf or maybe two different room one is a room full of objects and the other is a room full of moment consciousness pictures a room full of snapshots on the wall so he hasn't integrated these rooms he hasn't quite figured it out and this is why so hyper with story and i think he's going to lose to story because he can't help but explain all this stuff with story we don't have another language and again to build your to build your woo free stew you're just not going to be able to live in this world and do it you know you're going to you can't even go off in a mars colony and try to start your new world this is the utopian hope and it fails every time from the moment that you as a little fetus heard your mama's voice there's no hope of there's no hope of being free of your constructedness it just isn't and so once you heard your mama's voice you're probably going to like it at some point you're going to hate your mama's voice and then you're going to react to it but ontology is its own justification and whether you well let's use the biggest the biggest voice in our politics right now whether you like donald or hate the donald everything is revolving around the donald and so if you really want to get away from the donald you got to stop talking about him because the degree to which you let the donald in your life is the degree to which he will be in your life so the self is the connection between conscious moment and memory that is the story i am a story relationships are a story civilization is a story i think we would i think again peterson is right here and i think he and i will got this from peterson and peterson got it from piaget and and a host of all others we are embodied stories and our representations which are the stories we tell or the stories we draw first we act out these stories okay first there's drama we act out these stories but we cannot process this life apart from story we just can't do it so uval harari sits down and what he does in his meditation as he says i meditate to eliminate all story and that makes sense because he's he's he's working hard in meditation to eliminate the self and so in many ways harari is a is a hyper sam harris he is in a sense trying to live trying to see the world without story that's exactly what he says i think it's on his his video he does about himself explaining gayness um because he's gay apparently so he's trying to see the world without story he's trying to follow sam harris's way but when i read when i read sapiens or when i read homo deus why are those such engaging books he writes story it's the only way i can appropriate that which he tells me he sees without story i was having a conversation with with a new friend since my channel he's lives outside of toronto i've had some fun conversations with him and and he he got into the buddhism and story and moment and all of this and i learned a lot from that conversation and actually it's nathan i did a video with him i i can out him i'm not outing all of my conversation sources because i don't want to you know i don't want to dirty their lives in any way by outing them i don't want to dirty their lives in any way by outing them but that was nathan and we talked about how buddhism works in terms of the self or the non-self and our conversations continue in that and i'm sure and these he tells me that my videos have been fruitful for him my conversations with him have been fruitful for me and so i'm trying to piece together you know all of the layers the physical layer the story verse the the story that i am and and and the uses ship do i got that right you know who you're you know who i'm talking to you know the ship that is it's it's all different pieces but it's the same ship it's the problem of identity if if let's say all my all my cells are different than when i was well all my cells are different from when i was conceived you know right was that me and now we're into the borson question to what degree um when david in the psalm says you knew you know we you knew me when i was conceived well being god can you know me before i exist well now we're getting into theology here and what am i and i actually began thinking a lot of these thoughts years ago when i was trying to get my mind around the resurrection because thinking okay that cremation and resurrection and you've got being lost at sea and eaten by sharks and resurrection and buried in a buried in a pine box and resurrection and what exactly does god raise when he raises me and now suddenly i have the problem of is he going to raise the 20 year old me is he going to raise the 30 year old me this gets this gets into issues when people for example get dementia in their old age you know you run into these issues as a pastor someone gets dementia in their old age and they start um i knew one person he didn't have dementia he had aphasia and whenever he he couldn't say he couldn't do anything besides sing hymns and cuss and and he'd walk into church and bullshit bullshit bullshit bullshit and his poor wife was mortified because stop saying that and it's like sweetheart we all understand this is aphasia you know he can't talk but what's coming out is bullshit bullshit bullshit it's okay we understand that he doesn't mean bullshit well where is meaning and so where is me and when christ raises me and gives me a new body how is that related to this body and how does that connect with the fact that jesus still had scars but yet he could appear in a locked room and eat a fish so so what exactly will god raise when he raises me he will raise this story and so i talked to my friend he watched the what is truth video and we have these private conversations i have these private conversations with people and so often i think boy i wish i could videotape this and put this out because many of you would enjoy this conversation because this is what we're talking about so so so what is truth and why do we want why do we want truth because because we want stability well why do we want stability because we want predictability why do we want predictability because we want to control why do we want to control because we want to ensure sam harris's snapshot of a pleasant consciousness existence and and we want to we want this to keep going and why do you get depressed when you're old because you pretty soon figure out this isn't going to go for long and why do men in their midlife crisis buy red sports cars because they're hoping to reclaim some of what they had when they were you young and why do we have these movies where where people my age or older go back and with our current mind we have these mind swapping movies right with this my current mind i go and then i well if i went back to college now it wouldn't be me and it wouldn't be college and if i could go back and do things differently it wouldn't be the same you can't you can't step into the same river twice you can't even step into the same river once and so what am i what is the self and my best answer is the self is a story and so what does god resurrect well he resurrects the body yeah sort of what he really resurrects is this me that i experiences of story well what about sprit blame sprit blame sprit split brain patients who one side of the brain is an atheist and the other side is is is a believer and this is why i say only a god can judge well why because a god can see a god can know all of the mes all the way back to conception and a god can know all of what formed me in this stew we call historical culture and the athens that's in it and the greeks that are in it and the hebrus that are in it and the pragmatists that are in it and the and my parents and ancestors that are in it and and all the people when i you know if i take the little dna test and swab my tongue all of those people that i've received the the dna from and all and then the epigenetics and only a god could see through all of this and actually do right by history this is part of why i'm a christian because you might say well is that an old man in the sky well in all fairness representing god as an old man in the sky is something that in the 10 commandments he said don't do so jesus you know this is a point of argument in the protestant reformation is jesus fair game to represent well representations of jesus are problematic well why are they problematic because you cannot represent something in this world without initiating this whole history of constructedness so does jesus have red hair and blue eyes or blonde hair and blue eyes and is jesus good-looking or is he without form or or comeliness as the old translation of isaiah says and on and on and on and on and this is why we have all these conversations so this is where we're at so the self is the connection between the conscious moment and the memory i am a story my relationships are a story my marriage is a story my relationships with children are a story my relationships with this church are a story and they're they're connected with they're connected with all kinds of of layers and they're connected with history and they're connected with my body and they're connected with the stories that have gone before and it's one enormously unbelievably complicated ball the likes of which given that i am conscious for for maybe only 16 to 20 hours of every 24 hour period of an 80 to 90 year lifespan can only bury barely touch even though my watchers are processing and knowing far more than i can but my memory is limited and and snapshots can add things that i don't know and here we are in the midst of all this and so story is the best that i can do i am a story my relationships are stories civilization is a story america is a story story scales and connects and even subsumes the individual into larger narratives and so postmodernity says we can't handle these stories and they have a point but who could god so well let's say you don't believe in a man in the sky you don't believe in a literal being well something is functioning out there and something exists out there and again i get back to my ontological argument it would be a terrible shame if there was actually no finally such thing as justice or history or anything else because all we are is some strange byproduct evolutionary byproduct of but that doesn't make sense either because why are we here at all you know there are there have been times when i try to be an atheist mentally and i just can't get there i really just can't get there because you say well swallow you know give me you know the old story give me one miracle the big bang at the beginning and i'll explain the rest well first of all i don't have time to listen to your second explanation and secondly the parts that i've seen and the deeper i look into them don't seem to mesh and now for many of you you say the same thing about my religion you get that but i'm just telling you what i think buddhism you know there is a skeptical there is a skepticism regarding me and my story that my friend and i talked about that was a really helpful conversation and the skepticism can be validated by experience and this is what you get with sam harrison his meditation and it's his psychedelics the question is always and so there's a there's a there's a someone in my meetup who's got a phd in neuropsychology and you talk to him about these drugs he's got a very different opinion about these drugs and maybe i'll have to have him he probably doesn't want to be on here because youtube is a place for people with not a lot to lose and i'm a pastor of a small church so i don't have a lot to lose but he he's got a career to think about and so actually one of my sons says someone said maybe i should you know it's tempted to go on video and i told my son don't go on youtube you're you're too young you've got too much to lose by your 20 year old self spitting out what you think now tim keller has asked once why hasn't he why didn't he write books until his 50s because he said anything i wrote in my 20s i probably want to burn now sorry all you 20 year olds that's how it feels to be a 50 year old so he waited till his 50s because i thought well maybe now i know enough to be helpful and i'm young enough to still be able to write and i get that i get that and i i think that's part of the reason i'm glad we're seeing the jordan peterson we're seeing now because he's gotten a lot of his stuff worked through he's he's sorted himself out in a lot of ways and and pardon me but my facile by facile appearances of watching a guy closely for a year he he did he win the cortical lottery that jonathan height talks about he seems to struggle with depression and he's talked about that he's built for himself a stable marriage and a good family and and i think part of what makes his story attractive to a lot of people is that he shows people that you know you don't have to be born with the body of lebron james to really excel in hierarchies in this world you can build a good marriage and you can build a good family and you can build a good life and you can impact the world there can be meaning and i think that's a compelling aspect of his story and his and his late um his late rise to fame and his late status rocket and again we have no idea where this whole thing is going to go but but do do psychedelics actually make us more informed of the truth or do they just shut off certain portions of our brain so that we're dumber and it's it's kind of like the question of the drunk who says i drive better when i'm when i've had a few drinks why because i pay more attention now almost everyone will say well yeah a certain part of your mind is paying attention but your whole mind is compromised by the alcohol um so so now we're back into the question well what is the real world well the secret sacred self really loves being on the drugs because i feel like i'm full of power or the secret sacred self loves watching a movie in imax because there's a funny thing that happens when i watch things on screen i identify with them and i connect with them and when i when i watch star wars i feel like luke skywalker or princess leia or darth vader who knows who you feel like so there's some skepticism regarding me and my story and the skepticism can be validated by experience and and this fits into dominant materialist paradigm and that's what's you know so the western my friends and and it's not just nathan my friends who other friends in my regular world who are deep into meditation and buddhism you know they tell me well this is helping me handle my life better partly because this is helping me handle me better i'm in better control of myself same thing happens with therapy same thing happens with christian discipleship and so in that sense you look at this and say well all these religions are the same at some levels they're very similar but at other levels when you get into the narrative levels they're different and you know i as a christian am looking for something very different than an accomplished yogi who is trying to break the cycle of reincarnation i have no plans of coming back into this world and continuing to work on my stuff and now catholics and to a degree orthodox might say well you've got purgatory to look for um protestants because of our history of dealing with the bible say god will do it somehow but we're not going to speculate how so so we're not going to speculate about purgatory we're not going to write about it we can think about it but i can't talk about it publicly so and some people have keep asking me in the comments have you converted to roman catholicism yet no and other people write me letters and say sure i'm glad you're doing this as a projestant not like those old catholics so yeah there you go tribalism it fits into the dominant materialist paradigm but it also flirts with material it also flirts with materialist nihilism and and that's the thing because if i convince myself that i am not a story or that my story itself is an illusion well i really do want my story to continue and i really do want my story to get better and and that's where you're really engaged in christianity where your individualist story that i connect now you get into the bible you get into the book of revelation you're given a new name now that means things exegetically and in terms of the symbolic the symbolic story of the bible but as a christian i anticipate bringing and i have no idea how this can work again i was i've been thinking about this for years i anticipate whatever the me that is seeing the god that is and then we can't help but use stories and and representations with this with my own eyes this is the language of the bible but there is a meanness that transcends so that the disciples when they see jesus there's definitely identity confusion and dissonance that's going on there but jesus is very clear it is i and we see this in lord of the rings with gandalf the white versus gandalf the gray and and peter jackson has some of that in the movies you can see some of that that gandalf the white is gandalf but he's a perfected gandalf and c.s lewis talks this about us and the apostle paul talks this about us that the paul vander clay that will reign with christ in the new heavens and the new earth will be a perfected paul vander clay it won't be this paul vander clay subject to decay but it will be the paul vander clay that and again how to language this stuff that should always have been c.s lewis deals with this in his narnia chronicles especially the last battle which is one of my my favorites of the narnia chronicles because this is terribly difficult for us to talk about and you get into paul writing about you know someone caught up in the third heaven wink wink it was paul things that are ineffable what does that mean he can't talk about them because and and this again is someone who's on psychedelics they'll say well i i can't talk about this so is that the brain shutting down like some materials well when we die our brain shuts down and then we have the tunnel of light and we go for it and so very interesting near-death experiences have some commonalities to psychedelic experiences and someone might argue ah materialism confirmed when the brain shuts down we have these crazy experiences when i take psychedelics the brain shuts down we have these crazy experiences i can achieve these things through maybe being in a zero in in a tank where there's zero input if you go into a very dark cave you will start to see hallucinations we know this our minds are chattery and if we stop input our minds will pick up the story and and work out their own stuff inside of us we know this and so meditation well what is meditation well is this what we're doing so then sam harris if he wants to keep his materialist credentials which are again suspect for a lot of people if he wants to keep his materialist credentials what he might say is that through meditation i intentionally shut down parts of my brain and but it's all still within my brain and this is where young and his collective unconscious gets into trouble and yes there this is what's so interesting about peterson because he's pinging so many different communities and bringing them into one conversation and so now we have the christians and the youngians and the christian youngians and the christians who write me and say young is an occult leader stay away from him and don't talk to those people i get i get not crazy letters i get lovely letters from people and again your letters are lovely and if i missed your letter i'm sorry i can't keep up with all of them but i again i wish i could i wish i wish i weren't i wish i weren't bound to 24 7 but again i'm a christian when we've been there 10 000 years bright shining as the sun i have no less days to sing god's praise than when we first begun and part of my anticipation of the new heavens and the new earth is that i will get to spend see now i say eternity because everlasting is different from eternity i will get to everlastingly because eternity is really more of a category than a time frame i will get to everlastingly enjoy incredible conversations with all of the people that can stand the presence of god and that jesus brings in as his friends there's a little dallas willard in there obviously but i will get a chance to now look you know read peter creeped books peter creep you know bring socrates into heaven that's peter creeped is an interesting guy but you know i i will get a chance to and to talk and to enjoy and to and and this will be at all layers in the new heavens and the newer so it's represented as a banquet and so my father passed away when he was having a conversation with someone and and my father did die doing what he loved to do he was sitting at a table and he was having coffee with someone and the waitress came and asked if he if he wanted coffee and my father always said yes to coffee and he paused and he had a heart attack and he died on the spot and and when i thought about that i thought about the fact that he he wasn't planning on going because i talked to him the day before he had some health issues and i said how do you feel dad fine he was a little annoyed with us because there was nothing wrong with me and he died the next day but he he he he went to sleep in the coffee shop and he woke up in the banquet of the lamb where god brings into his harvest the the fruit that he has sown in the cultural stories of the world and so the banquet of the lamb won't be limited to the food that jesus ate in first century palestine there will be foods from every corner of the world now you get into my calvinist kyperianism all of which god looks at and says this is mine i am the god and i will claim these and then we think oh what about me ah but let me tell you about this god why is the world so filled with glory because he loves to share and he loves to share god the sun shines on the just and the unjust god loves to share even with people who don't deserve it and and this is my god and this is my joy as being a christian and well why some of you have commented in letters paul you're too nice well i can be not nice and truth be told you don't want to see me when i'm not nice but life is too short to waste on a lot of egoistic self-indulgences and i know that now as a 50 year old having wasted a lot of time and yeah there are ways that you can trigger me and there are buttons that you will push and i'll not tell you where they all are because i'm not stupid but whether it's the homeless alcoholic or the determined atheist are you saying atheism and alcoholism or same thing no or the person struggling with their gender identity or or or or or human beings are made in the image of god and they are amazing beyond description they are also sometimes evil beyond imagination and so i think that's a good point and i have to figure out what my best approach towards people are usually getting mad at them doesn't do much excel except indulge my inner angry man boy i'm rambling in this one so you get the politics of transgenderism why does this area spark debate it's a tiny element but it's a growing element because we are not disconnected from our environment and we see this with suicide and depression to what degree is the story verse on gender shaping individual stories on gender and i've got a lot of concern i've got a lot of concern in this area partly because i think kids are being you know what happens what there was a very interesting article written in the atlantic on transgender what happens when a confused 13 year old says mom i think i'm a mom i think i'm a boy in a girl's body and what happens when the mom has been primed because of because of signaling because of virtue signaling because of not wanting to be a bigot because i've wanted to be part of the ascendant morality heard because they've without even knowing it deeply imbibed the the the religion of the secret self and oh my goodness and then rushes out and in the case of this one australian woman starts giving uh i think it was a boy starts giving her son estrogen and because that she was getting it for hot flashes or something and well this starts making changes in the body and a few years later no no that was a mistake well what would have happened if surgery had happened and and drugs had scorched the person's reproductive system there at a what was a struggle at an age of 13 that is more and more common because we watch each other and we learn from each other and especially when you're young you're leaving the parents and you're bonding with your peers and everyone is saying to be a certain thing is high status and to be another thing is low status well we we had all this angst about to be a a beautiful wealthy football player is high status to be a poor ugly nerd who loves math and chess is low status or with women to look like a airbrush supermodel and a magazine is high status then body image issues with people is low status and that then triggers bolemy and eating disorders what disorders are we triggering by rejiggering this system that we are living within we have no idea but early indications are there's loss that's happening because as peterson i think says so well if we're functioning at 85 to get to 90 is really hard but it doesn't take much to drop to 60 and the fear is that that's what's happening in a number of areas we're tinkering with things we don't know enough about and so to what degree is the story verse on gender shaping individual stories on gender we see the same connection and depression identity meaning and status i am not an island i am a story and i am deeply tied to all the stories around me and i care deeply about the way in which this story that i identify as me is in all of the other stories that in fact is where the hierarchies come in and every story that you invest in exchanges suffering for meaning so i'll undergo the surgery because i think that'll fix my problem but what if it doesn't every movie we see is an exchange of of suffering for meaning if a story has no challenge you are bored with it and look for a challenge in drama look at the arc of every american movie there's a challenge and the protagonist overcomes the challenge and is transformed by it this is the hero's journey this is star wars this is lord of the rings this is james bond this is every single movie now you can find movies usually art house films where you have suffering and no meaning and the only way you can enjoy a story like that is actually if you're put together solidly enough to say oh man that's deep but i would argue that story is again colonizing the moments and the world of objects in through that we see this playing out in the fandoms and you know so so my friend was talking about and then the reddit people talking about you know most of the people in vancouver were sam harris fans and so the sam harris fans would cheer when sam made a point that they thought was a winning point you know what when you do that you're participating in the story verse you're indulging in the story verse you would have to be spock like to sit back and say sam made a good point but there's no feelings but remember spock was only half vulcan so movies with all suffering and no meaning are hated by americans and relished by people who find their meaning in embracing meaninglessness which is a story i don't know that you can embrace anything without story because again look at what we've done what is embrace it's this first we act out then we represent it in words and for all of the ways i disagree with jordan peterson some of these things that he taught me i think are dead on right about us and that's one of them just look at it to embrace something means what it's a drama that we have represented in words and it's now become abstracted and that's the only way we can talk it's the only way we can think you know it's it's the only thing we can do it's just how we are so materialism has a meaning problem there's no meaning for objects in space so story colonizes it and whether or not you want to fess up to your story well you'd not watch that movie it'd be a snapshot it would be fruit in a bowl there is more meaning in a forum for action than there is in fruit in a bowl so listening to my witnesses that went to the went to the event in vancouver the sam harris fandom doesn't seem to smile much maybe that's a cheap shot i don't know so if you're a smiling sam harris person let me know and i think part of the reason is that it's kind of a dour view and and atheism has always had a certain dour nature to it and and it's not you know this is where the melanie bruster video that i played comes in church is part of what we do we come together to mourn but we also come together to celebrate well what do we celebrate the resurrection well that seems weird why would we celebrate something that we can't demonstrate to sam harris but it happened two thousand years ago because it's a story that colonizes my story so the story of the resurrection colonizes the story that is paul vanderkley and how does it change it well it changes it to the degree that i can serve alcoholics who are homeless and i can serve a small church and i can serve the seven thousand some odd of you out there in youtube land and i can serve and i can serve and i can serve because the resurrection story has colonized my story and has it got woo in it yeah it's got woo in it it's got a lot of woo because mind and physics are integrated because my god is the lord of physics and when jesus walks on water well he's walking on water because water is his servant and it obeys him just like my hand is my servant now this is where i'm still rolling in my head it's a video about woo it'll be about woo now not and about natural and supernatural is it supernatural when my hand moves now again something happens in my brain i decide to move my hand my hand you know i'm my nervous system is extended in my body but is it woo that moves my hand and so the mma fighter says it's all woo baby and in that sense he's right if mind and matter are integrated and jesus walking on water is is the water was obedient to jesus as my hand is obedient to me now in fact the water is probably more obedient because there are lots of ways in which nature can disrupt my hand moving if i have a stroke maybe the right side will be paralyzed so on and so forth so and this is c.s lewis ration colonizes reason colonizes nature jesus colonizes nature the story verse colonizes the matter verse that's why this water this water bottle is the shape it is we have colonized it very well we are pretty earnest about winning winning is a story value which we derive significant meaning and ego rewards is this borrowed meaning for the sam harris folks who cheered during the conference in the middle of the points they're winning that's why they cheer c.s lewis trying to explain church to people says praise is inner health made audible why do we worship we celebrate the resurrection why do churches meet on sunday they celebrate the resurrection why do churches celebrate the eucharist or lord supper or communion we celebrate the resurrection the god witness said harris's disposition on say stage was telling he was sitting there and he was ready to shoot down all the arguments that came not only is world a space for objects i am an object and my thoughts are facts and i'm going to shoot down non-facts that's the world view peterson was more engaged leaning forward and when the video comes out i suspect well i'll get a chance to see this peterson was leaning forward and said you know he was listening also again as i mentioned earlier status wise we'll have to see if peterson hardens in his status or if he remains for lack of a better word supple i think that's been one of the most attractive elements of his persona in this is he has remained supple and when i had my little conversation with him that was one of the things that impressed my watchers most is this guy is having a conversation now tonight i'll shake his hand lord willing at the event in sacramento and i'll get my picture taken and i'll post the picture so y'all can see and you know we'll we'll see what happens but here's something that happens when you're famous if you go to the website you could probably find it and dig it up you can find where this particular vendor of where this particular vendor of photographs posts all the photographs that you can find them and so what happens when your picture is taken with tens of thousands of people well you get less subtle that's part of what happens so peterson is still supple he's not jaded and you know we've been having this conversation about his giving interviews so and so why am i so fascinated peterson well i'm learning from him i'm learning not just from the content that he's giving i'm learning not just from the facts but he i'm learning from a whole other range of facts from watching and and there's vicariousness to him he's about my same age and i was talking to my wife about him the other day he's bringing my wife into this if she knew this um because she doesn't trust any of you out there sorry so so if you come tonight and you see her don't say hi to her that's you're not maybe i'll edit this out no i won't so so yeah so there's vicarious things going on with peterson and me obviously um and it's a well you're about the same age and temperamentally there's there's some similarities there's huge dissimilarities but i'm enjoying watching him and i'm learning from it there's vicariousness what if this had happened to me part of me thinks oh would i like the money and the fame part of me would would i like the disruption in my what in my life no do i want my kids actually getting that kind of attention in their 20s frankly no you know i see these people bringing their children up to be child stars and i think what are you nuts that's one sure way to ruin your kid but you know peterson seems put together and his daughter seems to be interested in this phenomenon and participating and you know the older you get the better equipped you are to deal with this stuff i look at these basketball players in their 20s getting all of this fame and all of this money are football players and i think this is a bad thing i think it's a bad thing but hey after 18 or 21 you can do what you want so you take the bad with the good and a lot of people fail the challenge and people are like yes lord test me with the lottery well the the real fact is most people fail those tests and the fact that we think we would survive them is usually self-bias so why do we watch we're watching a story and we like the story that's what's interesting to us we see our own story nested within the larger story the story is higher up the value hierarchy than the objects and i caught on reddit this comment about elton john's cup why and you know i'm surprised i hope peterson pounced on that because to me and now again it's really hard when you're on stage and doing this in front of people and it's really easy to be sitting back and watching and having thoughts in your own office when you don't have all that pressure on you it's like you know sinking that free throw at the at the nba finals versus shooting in your backyard but you know elton john's cup is the perfect illustration of hierarchy because if elton john's lips touched the cup suddenly that cup would be a different cup and even if the even well let's say you know you do this with signatures with you know autographs i should take my book tonight i have a lot of my graph my book i didn't think of that i'll probably forget maybe i should have a monograph bucko what do you say bucko you want to go to the event tonight i'll see vlado vlado bought bucko and so vlado gets the credit but well it should bring vlado i should find my hard copy of 12 rules that i got in the in the simulation event in san francisco so should finish my video see this is why i do powerpoint because i ramble our watchers want to watch and prod the conscious self to pay attention this is why we watch we watch because there's stuff to learn and those of you who are sam harris fans have learned stuff from sam harris and so feel gratitude towards him and and if you're a jordan peterson van you've learned from jordan peterson and feel gratitude towards him and that's the whole business was patreon which i didn't understand and peterson when he explained why he started patreon he said people feel grateful and want to express it and i think why would people want to send me money they feel grateful for me making these videos and i get letters all the time from people that say thank you for making these videos keep making them and part of me thinks would i watch these videos i don't know but i'm watching peterson's videos and i'm making these videos because making them helps me think it out and i don't fully understand this whole dynamic and will it come to an end someday yeah i'll die what comes next i have no idea will my peter will my videos merge from peterson onto other topics could be how long will be i will i be on jordan peterson i was on tim keller for 10 years what's going to happen to jordan peterson we have no idea so we watch because we watch the story and we're interested and we might not even know why we watch the story and some of you have said i've stopped watching jordan peterson i only watch you so thank you it's easier to contact me than it is to contact jordan peterson but the more subs i get the the harder that is so you know but maybe it won't go anywhere and and a part of me really hopes it doesn't because having lunch with some of you or having you come to the meetup or meeting you tonight or i'm having the i'm having a ball and well yeah if i had a hundred thousand subs and sponsors and i could give up my day job see here's the thing about i don't know and you know what question do you want to ask peterson i i'm not going to ask questions that want to prod him towards christianity because i can't imagine how tired he is at the end of a show i have more questions about you know are you going to keep teaching at the university when are you going to start the biblical lectures those are my kind of questions and they're again personal questions and they're questions that involve the story that is jordan peterson and this is what the fun of this is for me because apparently i'm an extrovert i have to be really in many ways and so when someone pops up and says boy paul i'm thanks for making these videos these have been helpful i kind of like to know why they've been helpful you kind of like to know a little bit of your story and it's cool it's just really cool and i these are good things and this is why jordan peterson when he can't answer all his mail stops and and is moved by people saying i read your book and it helped me there are so few better things we can do in this world than that than to help someone and and let's give some credit to sam harrison this okay to have someone say my my son is a good person my stream of conscious memories that i identify as a story it's better my story is better since learning from you that's wonderful and when therapists hear that they cheer and as a pastor do i want people to do i want people to come to christ absolutely do i want people to become christians absolutely do i want people to come to my church that flatters me do i do i want all of those things yes but when someone comes to me and says you know i'm still an atheist but you've been helpful to me thank you why i love that it's affirming and i think god loves that too well i'm regret projecting up onto god yeah could be and some christians in my audience might take issue with what i just said but this gets part of my priesthood of all believers calvinism where you know if you are if you are being a good farmer then that is god's calling for you to be a good farmer and if you are if you're a truck driver and you're being a truck driver to the glory of god you are working in god's kingdom and if you are a better father and this is do i want to make tony soprano a better mob boss i'd like it better if he'd give up the protection racket and the murder and the uh prostitution and all of these things but even if tony soprano came to me and said i feel better because of you i would say i'll take that as a plus so i've wandered too much i don't want to make another two-hour one i know some of you say oh the longer the better but here it is so yep i'm going to see jordan peterson tonight and lord willing and the vip thing i'll probably shake his hand and he might remember me i've had a conversation and done some videos about him but i'm not i don't have high expectations for any of that i i'd like to hear him i'd like to hear him talk about his plans for the future but i'd like to hear how yeah if i had a chance to sit down with him i could sit down with him for hours i'd talk about him for hours you know the conversation with him for hours would be easy but i'd have a lot of questions probably more about so what are you going to do for me which is when are you going to start the biblical lectures again i really want to hear what you do with exodus i really love to know what you're going to do with levitticus i'm kind of set up for being disappointed but because levitticus is a really hard book but it's a really cool book and then there's the rest of the bible which you'll never get to but thank you all for watching it's been great i'm not signing off i intend to do more videos but um no it's just sincere thanks to all of you who have written me and those of you support me on patreon i really you know when i started this patreon video i was like i'm going to do you know when i started this patreon business i was very hesitant and then when i started it i thought i shouldn't do pay-for-play things because i don't like that as a pastor i don't like because because there are a few people in my church who are very generous with their money i can spend a lot of time with other people in the church and other people in the community who don't have any money that is a great system and it's the system of the church patreon doesn't work with that system patreon is pay-to-play and i thought i don't want to do pay-to-play things on patreon that would probably bump up the amount of money i get on patreon and yeah yeah no more money is better than less money but the more i think about it i think well you should do pay-to-pay things on patreon to say thank you to your patreon supporters and i should get this because i'm the pastor that says misery deliverance gratitude but so on and so forth and i'm working with the deacons to set up online giving if you'd like to donate to my church donations to the church if you're uh if you file taxes to the united states government donations to my church are tax deductible they're not the patreon so that's an upside and donations given to my church don't come to me they just go to support the church because the church has been supportive of my videos i i'm happy when people donate to the church because this keeps me going if i had a different council and they'd say no more videos on church time i don't know how i'd do that because pastors times are really flexible but also i would probably have less opportunity for making videos but as those of you who are watching my sunday sermons on my church channel can see um my videos my my talking at this strange contraption bleeds into my sermons and vice versa because i'm all one me and i'm all one story and all these stories are coming down into me so i told myself i was going to shut up nine minutes ago and i'm shutting up now um should i re-entitle this story with woo in it i don't know