https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Se1Lb7crcVk

 Hi, this is Paul and I finished chapter 2 in Peterson's book last night So here are some thoughts rule 2 is treat yourself like someone you are responsible for helping Hi this was an interesting chapter a lot of it had the Some of the Adam and Eve stuff from the biblical series in it A lot of it had some of Peterson's what on Jesus Creed was called Calvinist anthropology and so I can agree with that and and as a pastor I I had a few thoughts about it and Let's just jump in as a pastor people are take terrible care of themselves I have a lot of older people in my church and the oldest member of my church every Sunday brings donuts for the crowd and I watch the diabetics line up and eat the donuts every week and They do Weight is a constant issue for so many Americans as Peterson points out in one of the videos he did Recently or the Joe Rogan one he did yesterday while medical issues Take them out their decisions or avoidance nearly always hastens the end one thing I've noticed as a pastor is that people just like Peterson says in this chapter. They don't take their pills And and so often they don't seek treatment. They don't They don't take care of themselves and most of the reason they don't take care of themselves is because they're avoiding it and the reason they're avoiding it is as I think partly because They're avoiding some they just want to avoid this is how We as I think Americans. This isn't solely this isn't unique to Americans. Obviously, I think this is human but but as Americans our dominant Our dominant focus our dominant method of addressing suffering is distraction in this country And I think that's obvious by Television movies music strategy shopping drinking porn Video game playing our dominant mode of dealing with suffering as Americans is distraction and we have an entire Entertainment and commercial Economy based on that If you are suffering if you are feeling any angst if you are feeling any need shop Take a vacation watch TV do porn find a relationship Everything is a tool to avoid suffering. And so when it comes to And so often I see that it is not the medical issue that that really takes people out. It's all of the Character and lifestyle choices issues and these issues Have so often been hard-baked into the The Issues and these issues have so often been hard-baked into people in their 30s 40s 50s and 60s So by the time they hit their 70s or 80s, you know, their their bodies are shot. They're shot by poor eating they're shot by Alcohol, they're shot by inactivity and we all know this and you know You can't you can't watch the you can't watch the evening news and having the news scream at you that you know Go to the go to the gym eat right see your doctor and and people don't do it Well, why don't we do it? I think I think peterson kind of half answers that question here Most prayer requests are about human the human element habits or decisions Not the physical malady and mental health is ignored and avoided I've mentioned in some of my previous videos as with my father's ministry Where my church is located in town? Has a high population of homeless People living in group homes. This is this is one guy. I'm sure he's dead by now. He was He used to sleep. He used to sleep on the church lot under a pomegranate bush A number of years ago His name was larry and he he had family that lived in the neighborhood and many many of the people many of the homeless That I know still have family Around but they've they've destroyed their relationship with their family and larry was an alcoholic larry You can see on his hands He painted and he painted for a living and so he painted for a guy who had some Cheap apartments and so he'd hire larry. He'd pay him cash under the table larry would get enough money so that he would buy beer Larry would rather spend his money on beer and sleep outside If it got really cold Maybe he'd use some of his money to stay in a hotel room or sometimes his boss would Let him sleep in the apartment that he was painting but but this is how larry Um, this is how larry had his his life and one day He sits this is this is where folks they knock on my door my doors to the outside They come in and they sit and a lot of these people all they need to do is talk what what they um They they don't want me telling them they shouldn't drink. They already know that Um, just like everybody in church knows they should take care of themselves and they don't but but larry one day comes down And he sets up sets a beer can on my desk and says my life is in this can and I thought wow This this guy, you know Well, what words do I have to say to this man that would that would illuminate and somehow break the spell? you know, we'd all like to imagine in the In the second lord of the rings movie that we can be gandalf and we can walk up to um You know, we can walk up to king theoden and break Um saruman's spell on him, but i'll tell you as a pastor I don't got that power. I sit there and I watch larry or my friend daniel um, I watch them destroy their lives and You know, I daniel would say to me again and again don't try to save me. Don't try to save me yet You know He would also at the same time knock on my door and beg me to to give him money or sometimes i'd take him To the hospital and one day he says, you know, why why is it always you driving me to the hospital? Why am I never driving you to the hospital? I said, well, let's see. Um You you you're an untreated alcoholic and multiple drug user. You've got untreated mental illness you you eat out of the dumpster of the supermarket next door your um You're abusing your body constantly. You don't have a car. You don't have a You don't have a legitimate place to live So so it's a mystery to you why it's always me driving you to the hospital and not the other way around It's not a mystery to anyone else on this earth and this is exactly the human condition now Now again peterson on the human condition He I was going to pull up this. Um, I was going to pull up this This video but I didn't But you know, he he talks about the fact that we're you know, we're mysteries to ourselves and you hear this in the apostle paul And roman 7 the good that I would do I don't do you know ask anybody in my church Should you should you ask any diabetic in my church? Should you eat that donut? They'll say no and again the the difference so often health wise between the diabetics who are doing well and the diabetics are doing poorly is The diabetics who are doing well are not eating the donut. It's that simple It's that obvious yet the diabetics that aren't doing well are eating the donuts. So So What's with us and and this isn't just diabetics who are in their 70s and 80s Like I said before all of these problems started in our 30s 40s and 50s and we avoided the doctor We you know, and I do the same thing. Um, you know See a dentist see a doctor take care of your stuff Um, fire taxes on time save your money. We all know this stuff and we all don't do it and so, you know and then jonathan height gets into this in terms of the the rider and the elephant and and You know again part of what i've appreciated about peterson is his realistic View of the of the human condition. We're blind to ourselves others see us more objectively Which is why we pay doctors and lawyers to take care of us because the doctor who has a who has himself for a doctor Has a fool for a doctor and the lawyer who has himself for a lawyer has a fool for a lawyer now then this but now this all this admonition and And So so peterson's book is is some people are saying well, it's a self-help book and and there's an element to that in the book But but all this admonition is necessary but insufficient And and as a pastor, I know this I know this well often people will If they're frustrated with say someone else in the church or someone else in their family So pastor you should you should go talk to them and say, okay, i'll go talk to them But what are your expectations of me talking to them? Do you do you really think that if I tell all the diabetics? Hey, don't eat the donuts that they that they won't no people don't work this way And and even in jesus in the parable of lazarus and the rich man Lazarus and the suffering in hades calls up to I'm, sorry the rich man suffering in hades calls up to la Lazarus in the bosom of abraham and says and says to abraham send him back to earth So he warned my family and abraham says well He's got moses and the prophets if he's if he's not going to listen to them He's not going to listen to a man rising from the dead, which of course given the entire christian story You know makes sense So this this is the human condition and and peterson is a is a father figure But i'll tell you this daddy doesn't live with you and and if you're like me You know, you'll be listening to peterson for a while you found him But who knows how long and and there'll be someone else you're listening to and again It's back to the truman show everybody's riveted to the truman show truman walks off stage and everybody turns the channel and goes to something else Distraction in america is the chief way we deal with suffering Look at all the unused gym membership So so I joined a gym and and and really probably the best the only way that i'm managing to follow through on this Is because my son joined the gym and my wife joined the gym And my son who really struggled over the last couple of years with uh with discipline when he is in college He's really learned some discipline. So he's always like gym day and it's like I don't want to go to the gym. I really don't want to go to the gym But because my son is saying gym day just that little bit I go to the gym And so, you know peterson gets into this with his self-authoring program now while some of the advice you get is wrong Much of it is helpful Much of it is helpful often obvious, but the gap isn't following through and I think again here youtube is a great delivery system, but Here's the irony of youtube You know name whatever guru you have it might be sam harris or christopher hitchens or or jordan peterson or it might be an online preacher like like tim keller or or William lang craig or it might be a new age person and you know The your your your youtube gurus it might be paul vanderkley your youtube gurus come and go but youtube the platform Endures through it all and that's why they have their list of things there. They don't really care who you listen to They just want you to keep coming to youtube and they want you to keep coming to the ads and so One of the interesting things in reading that book 1493 was that how many of the how many of the products that shaped the exploration and the Exploitation of the new world were basically addiction driven tobacco Sugar and and now in america again our chief way to address suffering in america And I don't just mean big suffering. I mean the slow burning angst Neolism is distraction and that is exactly what google is dishing up for us on youtube That's why they've got all the things to the side. You're done with vanderkley. Okay, click on peterson. You're done with peterson Okay, click on keller you done with keller. Okay, click on hitchens. You're done with them. Okay, look at some cats You know on and on and on and on and google just wants to keep you tied there read screw tape letters C. S. Lewis makes the point that the um what the devils really want to do with people is just keep them mindless their whole life One of the you know another another really cool blog that I read Not a christian blog is slate star codex. It's a very popular blog scott. Alexander is the Is the guy who does it and he also is a psychologist? And and he he describes, you know, he has this great post from a few years ago. I'll put it in the I'll put the link in the comments. Um, he describes where he works I work in a wealthy mostly white college town consistently ranked amongst one of the best places to live in this country If there's anywhere that you might dare hope wasn't filled to the brim with people living hopeless lives It would be here But that hope is not realized every day I get to listen to people describe their problems That would seem overwrought if they were in a novel and made up if they were a think piece on the fragmentation of american society A perfectly average patient will be a 70 year old woman who used to live somewhere else But who moved a few years ago after her husband died in order to be close to family She has some medical condition or another and prevent that prevents her from driving or walking around much and the family She wants to be close to um Have their own issues So she has no friends within 500 miles and never leaves her house except to go to the doctor's appointments She has one son who is in jail one daughter who married a drug addict She also has a grandchild her only remaining joy in the world But her drug addict son-in-law uses access to him as bargaining chip to make her give him money for her rapidly dwindling Retirement account so he can buy drugs When she can't cough up enough quickly enough he bans her from visiting or talking to the grandchildren Plus he tells the grandchild it's her fault Her retirement savings are rapidly running out and she has no idea what she will do when they're gone Probably end up on the street. Also her dog just died Yes, and he's he's writing again from a community that everyone says well This is a good neighborhood and everybody here has money and people have retirement accounts and people have social security and they're driving good homes and And living in nice cars and I work in a community that is none of those things and so I read this and say absolutely Sometimes I I listen to my my friends who are into community development And I just want to say you show me a developed community Because i'll take you to the wealthiest most affluent community in sacramento And i'll open any door of the homes and i'll scratch a little bit and i'll find a sea of misery Why am I a calvinist because I have eyes and I look around And and so I work in a neighborhood that quite frankly at least when we when we get to characters like these you know People are like, oh, yeah, I get that and I find that people are amazingly fascinated with the lives of the homeless Why because deep down inside they know they are one bad decision away from it And and that that and that is true if they drive an outie or alexis or they buy all of their clothes at nordstrom's It's just true. So how bad things are? Yeah, things are bad. And so what scott alexander runs through is this little um this little thing just based on You know based on averages one percent of people are in prison two percent on probation One percent in nursing homes two percent have dementia 20 percent of people have chronic pain. That's true You know people in my congregation I I talk to them all the time they they fell or they hurt or something like that and then they get then they get on Opioids and you know prescribed by their doctor and and off we go into the opioid opioid thing read dreamland by quinones Seven percent of people have depression in any given year two percent are chronically disabled one percent are schizophrenic 20 are on food stamps one percent are Wheelchair sound seven percent are alcoholic and those are only the people who are being significantly disabled by alcohol Those aren't the people who for whom alcohol is a crutch that helps them go to sleep at night And it's a crutch for for when anxiety is is creeping up on them and they're self-medicating for all kinds of things with alcohol You know, it's it's no wonder that peterson's philosophy is shaped because it used to work He used to work with alcoholics and I just started chapter three and he's he's talking about life in in northern, Alberta So chronic heroin users unemployed disability Domestic violence sexually abused as children nine percent of people male and female have been raped during their lifetime This is life on planet earth And again, you wonder why i'm a calvinist and so then he runs through the numbers So he has this script and he says that of every 20 people you've got chronic pain. You've got alcoholism You've got unemployment and remember this doesn't count all the problems that don't fall easily into any quantified category like Everyone hates them because they're really ugly and annoying and it doesn't count things that I couldn't find good statistics on like How did a child die recently or doesn't count things that it would have gotten into trouble for including autism or single mother? It doesn't count a lot of things. It doesn't count children of divorce. What is that 40 50 percent? And and we all know what what that does to a child how it drives a truck through their emotional world And and so basically I as a pastor and you know I I sit down with people and you know, we get to know each other we talk we talk I just wait for it because at some point we're going to begin We're going to get to the place of their pain in their life and they're going to put it on the table for me Why are they going to put it on the table for me because they're crying out to tell someone and for me as a pastor I'm i'm one of the few safe people they can tell I lose my job if I stop if I start coughing up secrets You know like a therapist only often you come and see a pastor because you you know You don't have the 150 to plunk down and talk to a therapist and and your medical You know your medical coverage won't pay for therapy every week or you know, and and this is the world It really is and and this is the world this blows my mind because this is the world in In the most stable the most affluent the most privileged the most wonderful place to live Probably in all of human history I know that because I worked in the Dominican Republic with people who who had almost nothing and and here's the irony I don't find Americans all that happier in some ways they are and and in some ways the The miseries of of living as a desperately poor Illegal Haitian in the Dominican Republic is is more miserable and unstable but Less though than you might imagine again read Jonathan read Jonathan Haidt on this And and so peterson gets at that in this he says, you know, why why don't we take care of ourselves because deep down inside? You know, why should you take care of anyone as anything as ugly? Naked ashamed frightened worthless cowardly resentful defensive accusatory as a descendant of adam Even if that thing that being is himself. I do not mean at all to exclude women with this phrasing because they're in the same boat All the reasons we have discussed so far For taking a dim view of humanity are applicable to others as much as to the self There are generalizations about human nature nothing more specific, but you know so much more about yourself You're bad enough as other people know you um your You're bad enough as other people know you but only you know the full range of your secret transgressions Insufficiencies and inadequacies no one is more familiar than you with all the ways your body and mind are flawed No one is more no one has more reason to hold in contempt to see you as pathetic And by withholding something that might do you good you can punish yourself for all of your feelings a dog a harmless innocent Unselfconscious dog is clearly more deserving and if you catch scott Scott alexander's post. Yeah, and their dog died. I remember one person saying to me I was I was meeting with him and you know, he's he's he's well in years and yeah, my wife passed a few years ago, but What really killed me was when my dog died I have lots of friends who who say yeah people hate people But boy do I love dogs because when you come through the door at the end of the day That dog is so happy to see you and it doesn't matter What kind of jerk you've been all day long and the jerk you know You've been where you said someone came in the room and you said can I help you and inside your mind you thought I'm going to scream if I have to help another person and and then someone you know The people who have the highest stress at work are the ones who have to be duplicitous The ones who are working a call center where they're sitting there. Hello and the person on the other end is screaming at him again with daniel daniel used to He used to call the the the bank that you know meant that his social security would come through and and that's where I learned That you know call center people they they they can deal with three obscenities and then they have the right to hang up and daniel would burn through those three obscenities usually in the first three minutes because He was frustrated because oh, yeah, this is humanity What does it mean to know yourself naked or potentially worse to know your um to know To know yourself and your partner naked if you can't identify that sentiment You're just not thinking beauty shames the ugly strength shames the weak death shames the living and the ideal shames us all People say to me they have a hard time understanding hell I don't have a hard time understanding hell at all people say they have a hard time understanding judgment day I don't have a hard time understanding judgment day at all Think for a moment about a being if there is a god this god is more brilliant more Intelligent more beautiful than anything and everything you have ever seen on the planet If you read the bible every time an angel shows up everybody loses their stuff They fall flat on the floor and everything they can say is I I just I I just don't want to exist anymore That I wrote a piece on my blog i'll put the link in about hell and parties and I think You know dallas willard once once was asked who gets to go to heaven and dallas willard answered anyone who can stand it Well, what does that mean? It means that if you can imagine the kind of being who would make this universe the kind of being who would be the source Of all glory the kind of being who could um Who could make all of this in its intricacy or or okay? You're a darwinian the kind of being who could think through the kinds of mechanisms and and set up the kind of universe where all Of this would happen We get in the face of such being and we see ourselves And and we're undone Read c.s. Lewis's till we have faces probably his his best work of fiction Yeah, I don't have a hard time understanding judgment day I don't have a hard time understanding revelation six when when the great and the small the kings and the slaves of the earth Cry out to the mountains fall on us who can save us from the sight of the one who is on the throne And from the lamb Because when we see him we will see ourselves as who we really are And and we won't need god to read through a list and there'll be no you did this No, I won't you ever have a fight with someone you ever a fight with your parents or worse yet a fight with your spouse And it's all you know, you're the bad guy. I'm the good guy. I'm the victim. You ever have a fight like that Well, here's the thing when you see god there will be no fight because when you see someone that beautiful That pure that right that good we will see ourselves as utterly Distestable and we will beg to go to hell. That is our condition C.s. Lewis's great divorce. There's a bus leaves hell goes to heaven And almost everyone else wants back on the bus. They want to get back to hell They would rather die quietly and hopefully evaporate in the darkness Than live in the light yet peterson starts out with a good creation in genesis one God creates the world with a with the divine truthful word generating Habitable paradiso order from the pre cosmogonic chaos He then creates man and woman in his image imbuing them with the capacity to do the same To create order from chaos and continues his work You know when I read that sentence I thought except for the divine spark which theologically We would prefer say image of god Divine spark is is language that comes out of quaker movement so but I won't quibble too much with language But but this could be a calvinist preacher Creation fall redemption restoration. This is the this is the calvinist especially the the dutch reformed Four step movement creation fall redemption restoration and and here peterson starts out with a good creation and says god made the world good And then he goes on to god as god himself claims so go the story vengeance is mine I will replace sayeth the lord According to this philosophy you do not simply belong to yourself But metaphorically speaking there is also this you have a divine spark in you again I'd say you have the image of god in you which belongs to you Which belongs not to you but to god we are after all according to genesis made in his image we have the semi-divine capacity for consciousness Our consciousness anticipates in the speaking forth of being we are low resolution We are low resolution um kinotic that you know this is um I won't get I want to get into that right now versions of god We are um we are made um we can make order from chaos and vice versa in our way with our words So we may not exactly be god but we're not exactly nothing either um alvin plantinga's brother neil plantinga was a Um was my teacher at calvin seminary and if you've want to read a cut if you want to read some good books Read anything from neil plantinga because the guy is a the guy is a master author and his his lectures In systematic theology you wouldn't want to miss a clash you wouldn't want to miss a moment What a what a gift with words, but but neil plantinga says it this way He says we are fallen royalty that that is what human beings are and and with this image of fallen royalty You you get a glimpse of both the potential and the power but also the catastrophe of the fall And and c.s lewis, uh says it this way He says anytime you look at a human being you're looking at someone who is Who is who who may either one day become a creature that will be so godlike at this moment You would be tempted to bow and worship them Or they may become a creature creature that would be so ghastly That you would that that you would think them a demon from hell and in fact, I think we know this and we see this in life because When people get older when they become more and more themselves as they go through time They either become beautiful saints Or or horrible bitter Terrible sinners and and one of c.s lewis's arguments is that you know the thing about us is that we're new I mean 70 80 90 years is not enough differentiation and peterson makes the same point That that you know the reason young people are always looking at it themselves and everyone in high school is being unique All in the same way. Well, the reason they're like that is just they're young they haven't differentiated And so then you start to work with people who are in their 60s 70s and 80s That's why they don't go see the doctor. They're they're a world of of bad habits. That's exactly who they are And and so what what struck me again reading peterson's when he when I read this in his chapter I thought my goodness not only has the man hit the first point of reformed theology He's also hit the first question and answer of the heideberg catechism, which is one of the doctrinal statements of of the christian reform church What is your only comfort in life and in death that I am not my own but that I body and soul in life and in death Belong and not my own but belong to my faithful savior Jesus christ who has fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood and redeemed me from the tyranny of the devil And so he preserves me By the will of my father in heaven that not a hair can fall from my head. Yay All things must work together for my salvation Therefore by his holy spirit He also assures me of eternal life and makes me wholeheartedly willing and ready from now on to live for him And and chances are if you know someone in the christian reformed church and you visit their home, you may well find a copy Of an embroidery or some plaque of the first question and answer of the heideberg catechism hanging on their wall Because because for many of us this is this is right up there with psalm 23 in terms of things I turn to well Well, what what can I do with this with my crazy life and worse? It's easier to blame everybody which is why we do it But but when you actually get to the point of having enough strength to to realize that I am the source of my misery Well, what is my only comfort in life and in death that I am not my own This is why I must take care of my body This is why I should I should I should take the pills and not just give them to my dog Read petersons opening to the chapter and and and so one of the things that strikes me is Here's the crazy thing so If there's anything our culture is is a self-congratulatory culture we Imagine we are the pick of the litter the pride of the world and we and we think this because we have You know cell phones that are amazing and we have technology and we have wealth And so we we look we look back in the past and we think oh all those all those silly stupid um Immoral people who owned slaves and killed the whales and and did all these bad things Surely if I was back then yeah, um, yeah sociology of knowledge applies to everybody else But you know if you were back then you would have owned slaves and killed the whales or been slaves or been a serf because just About everybody was a serf or a slave And and as a as a point as an article that that peterson tweeted this week, you know We're all living like rockafy like rockafellers today But does that make us any morally better? Remember what I said at the beginning of the video American strategy for suffering is distraction And what that means is that well, i'm going to get that into that a minute with peter kreeft. Um, you know That we are we are wimpy characterless people and we are this way partly because Of the environment we have created to avoid the issues We have built this nation on avoiding our character problems And and so, you know, we don't want to deal with it. And so one of the things that strikes me often is is how well The world in the past dealt with this this is you know, this is some old church somewhere That's that's decaying and falling into this use but but here's the thing and we see this all the time We have this big discussion about immigration and oh, you know Should we let people in or not in but one of the things that you routinely routinely find is that people coming from undeveloped places in the world come to america and what They're humble they work in the fields. It doesn't mean they don't have problems. They deal with alcohol They deal with you know, all the distractions that we have here but for example, there's a there's a tongan church that that worships in our sanctuary on on sunday afternoons and You know they and so the the pastor there, you know speaks with a with a tongan accent and was raised there But now his children are here but every year he takes his children back there because You know now you stay with your grandma in that hut and you wake up in the morning and you you pluck that fruit off The tree and you know americans they think oh that sounds so idyllic Yeah, it sounds idyllic until you realize you don't have your nice toilet and shower and um, you know When the storm comes you you huddle for you hudder for warmth and you know, I you know Yeah, I was a missionary in the dominican republic. I know what it means to live in the caribbean I know what the caribbean looks like and I don't mean the resorts Well, well, what's going on? Why can these immigrants come to this country and they actually have a work ethic and they actually have their life together? And you would say well, they didn't have therapists Well, and this is part of the big point of peterson was that in the ancient world still filled with its problems still filled with its Immoralities still filled with its tragedies. They somehow managed to Keep their stuff together and to actually survive into this world how well They did it with religion. Well, what do you mean? They did it with religion and did that religion have problems? Yes But it worked. Well, why did it work? Well, you know it worked because it knew some things it knew some things that were frankly distracting ourselves to avoid Remember the title of this book that I bring up in almost every video I'm using ourselves to death. This could be a subtitle for the strategy of screw tape and cs lewis's screw tape letters now I want to play for you a little bit of a A little bit of a talk Now this talk was given by peter kreeft peter kreeft grew up in northern new jersey where I did he grew up in the reformed church of america, which is a Actually the church that the christian reformed church split off of in the middle of the in the middle of the 19th century He went to eastern christian high school same high school. I went to he went to calvin college same college I went to and and he was a very bright young man and the christian reformed church. That's very proud of its philosophers philosophers like alvin plantinga and his brother neil and nicholas waltersdorf, um, you know And george marsden and and richard mao were very this christian reformed church is very proud of its intellectuals And and the christian reformed church was really hoping that peter kreeft would be the next big Philosopher intellectual that calvin college would put out and would be a member of the christian reformed church and peter kreeft went and joined the roman catholic church And so he's um some people in the christian reformed church also hate him because he's a political conservative but you know, this is my lesson for people if you um If you don't take offense you can learn a lot you can learn a lot from liberals You can learn a lot from conservatives. You can learn a lot from a lot of people if you don't easily take offense So so peter kreeft went on and and part of what peter kreeft has written a lot of popular books about philosophy and socrates this is a this is a recording from an event that eric mataxis who now does a radio show and blog um eric mataxis Did called socrates in the city and if you listen to the whole thing Um, I don't know if the whole thing I I found a version on youtube, but you can find it on mp3 You can find it in written form Uh, just if just google peter kreeft the dark side Um, it's all over the internet. It's a wonderful lecture. I'll just play the the beginning of it But but you'll notice if you're used to listening to things another guy that i've listened to over the years is nt. Wright Um nt. Wright is in the is in the audience and he asked the question of peter kreeft so the thing is wonderful, but this is You know now part of my goal with this is to hook all you youtubers up with with some really good people and peter kreeft is another good person to listen to and if you like, um, well once you listen to this you'll you'll get a sense of that um jordan peterson's stuff is Is is not unique and and that folks have been saying similar kinds of things for a long time. So let's uh, Let's play a little bit of peter kreeft's. Um talk But by doing it Before we begin dr. Kreeft will speak for about 40 minutes after which we will have about 35 or so minutes for That's metaxas and he's a comedian and wait for this q a We always have a problem with the q a because a lot of people don't really understand what a question is Is It's always easy to get and you hear this in the you hear this in the peterson things too A lot of people don't really understand what a question is. This is an opportunity for me to give a speech Well, hey get a youtube account you give all the speeches you want a question, uh confused with pontificating ad nauseam I can see how you'd make that uh that mistake a lot of people never get in front of a microphone and stuff just happens, but um We want to keep that kind of magic to a minimum tonight, uh So thank you in advance for uh hearing what i'm saying But of course, there's someone here who's paying no attention and we'll know who that is in about 40 minutes um After we stop at 8 30 there's plenty more reception more hors d'oeuvres more wine But now of course, it's my very great pleasure to introduce dr. Peter crave Thank you Well from somebody who has not suffered very much you're supposed to receive some wisdom about suffering that's irony All right, let's just plunge in There's three kinds of evil that I want to talk about suffering death and sin What we fear most most of the time is suffering Then death then sin exactly the opposite of what it should be But that's all right. I'll start with the problem of suffering To live is to suffer that was buddha's first noble truth The truth that he thought was the most obvious and indisputable truth in life the day And again, this is this is peterson Suffering is something that that you can't deny data on which any quasi scientific theory of human life must Be erected And again, this is peterson Pain is the most obvious problem in the world This is no less true today For now that our civilization has succeeded in conquering half of humanity's physical pains By anesthetics and medical technology and boogie boards It has also doubled humanity's spiritual pains depression Despair divorce, which is more painful than death other betrayals loneliness emptiness meaninglessness the existential vacuum Did you catch that we've we've succeeded at eliminating the physical pains Isn't this opioid addiction isn't this alcoholism and we multiply the existential pains Victor frankl says quoting nici A man can endure almost any how if only he has a why This quote is also found in the second chapter in peterson's book the how is the circumstances including the suffering The why is a purpose and a meaning This is not a theory this is an observation frankl is a scientist he observed this to be true in the laboratory of auschwitz The corollary of this truth is that if we do not have a purpose and a meaning Then we cannot endure any suffering. That's inconvenient And again also notice the centrality of meaning again peterson Our culture seems to have made the faustian bargain of giving up a better why for a better how Giving up meaning for comfort We've conquered the world of pain, but we've lost our soul our meaning our hope our purpose And that's why the physical pains that remain though only half as bad in quantity compared to those of our ancestors Are twice as bad in quality And this is why Any amount of little physical suffering people embrace victimhood and they cry out because this is what our culture is supposed to fix twice as unendurable Without the meaning to surround them The end result is that though the pains are less we fear them and feel them more It's like the difference between childbirth and abortion To use a quantitative analogy for something that's not quantitative The birth has a hundred pains, but a thousand transcendent Meaningful joys the abortion has only a dozen pains, but no joys Suppose we took back our bad bargain like sydney carton in a tale of two cities Embracing christ-like martyrdom for his beloved lucy wisely exchanging the whole of his material goods his hitherto meaningless life For the pain of the guillotine and the pleasure of spiritual good moral meaning Including the hope for heaven That was such an excellent bargain that carton said of it. It is a far far better thing. I do Than ever I have done And again this from a culture You know that these are the riches that our culture has lost but riches that were common in past cultures Or like jim elliot the missionary martyr of ecuador Who realized the same truth when he said to those who called him a fool for risking his life to preach to the savage alcas? He is no fool to give up what he cannot long keep for what he cannot ever lose And yet The man who said what does it profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Did any human being in all of human history ever utter a single more practical sentence than that one? Yet though spiritual pain is deeper than physical pain physical pain can be very deep and very troublesome Its troublesomeness is not only physical it's also very deep Its troublesomeness is not only physical it dominates the spirit of everyone except those who are both the strongest and the sweetest of humanity Pain is like a jealous tyrant with a whip commanding all our attention at every moment shouting look at me look at me It's hard to meditate or calculate or compose music or poetry or discover great new scientific breakthroughs when you're being whipped or burned or cut all over your nervous system Now there are two obvious solutions to physical pain no and yes No tries to abolish it And this is quite natural and good and the modern west is very successful in doing that Yes tries to somehow accept pain but change our inner attitude towards it And this is the answer of the ancient east especially of hinduism and buddhism And in the ancient west of stoicism which is a kind of non-mystical buddhism The modern west prays grant me the courage to change what can be changed The ancient east prays grant me the serenity to accept what cannot be changed and both pray for the wisdom to know the difference But the modern west has not succeeded in conquering all pains by technology Instead it has created an artificial protective bubble that is empty of most of the physical pains of life that our pre-technological ancestors had to cope with But we found the bubble also empty of meaning and thus spiritually painful The safe space We've abolished 90 of pain and also abolished 90 of heroism and courage which are no longer needed in the bubble Each decade we get a little closer to brave new world That is to the greatest pain of all The pain of an absolutely meaningless life To quote one of america's greatest philosophers yogi berra Yes, we recognize wisdom even among the evil empire If this world was perfect it wouldn't be Basically what peterson quotes dostoevsky is saying right on One Brave new world by the way if you haven't read it you must read it's a prophecy If the west problem is failure, I think the east's problem is success For some people at least that is for the spiritual athletes who practice raja yoga or janana yoga or the buddhist noble eightfold path Pain is abolished By abolishing its root desire When there are no desires left there are no frustrations left Hindu or buddhist yoga can indeed succeed in killing off the desires The truth if if an ideology is a crippled religion when I see uh What I see often people being attracted to new age ideas That's basically like an ideology because oh i'm interested in buddhism or hinduism Buddhism or hinduism but they're not interested in meditation or or a serious discipline because look at those look at those religions Um, do you want to spend 10 hours a day meditating? Um, that's that's what it involves buddhist does overcome all pain But also all pleasure All fear but also all hope all hate But also all love All misery but also all joy This is a remarkable achievement But is it worth the price of the abolition of half our human nature? It looks like spiritual euthanasia Killing the patient the desires to cure the disease pain I think however, this is a misunderstanding I must confess that the buddhists that I have met have surprised me and impressed me with their peaceful alertness and spiritual aliveness They certainly are not spiritually dead But they have also surprised me with the inadequacy of their philosophy their explanations I must be as offensively honest with the east as I have been with the west Though and protest that the freedom from pain is not worth the price I will take the bitter with the sweet. Thank you the depth with the heights better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all From the moment of our birth human nature includes two Incompatible elements the presence of pain and the demand for its absence We all have pain and we all hate pain buddha's first noble truth and freud's pleasure principle What is pain it is the disproportion between desire and satisfaction In the words of england's richest philosopher, I can't get no satisfaction And you can't always get what you want The modern secular west tries to get the satisfaction The ancient mystical east tries to get rid of the desires The west tries to conquer pain the east tries to conquer the fear of pain Our common problem is that our desires are greater than our satisfactions The west tries to change that disequation by bringing satisfactions up to the level of desires Of course, this never works While the east seeks the same end by the opposite means of bringing desires down to or even below the level of satisfaction And this does work But only for the practiced yogan or enlightened buddhist East and west both give us roads for escaping the problem. They're opposite roads But they both escape the disproportion between desire and satisfaction, which is the formula for pain or suffering What is the christian alternative C.s. Lewis says in the problem of pain christ came not to free us from our pains but to transform them into his That's the answer in one sentence i'd like to try to unpack that answer And that's what he spends the time doing so i'll leave a link to this well worth your time One of my favorite one of my go-to things To listen to and someone in the um from from one of my last video mentioned my c.s. Lewis video mentioned Hitchens and and and the thing where was I going with with hitchens? I forget now. Um I left the comment there but you know the thing Oh, yeah, I remember, you know in a sense. He he says well christianity with this Um vicarious atonement thing leaves christians off the hook and and my point is that christianity is actually not an ideology because Christianity wants to say two things at once and and i'll get into that that on one hand Jesus does rescue us completely apart from ourselves But what do we pay for that? We we we pay with our lives, but does the payment from our lives actually? Accomplish that salvation. No This is calvinism. So the heidberg catechism first question and answer What is your only comfort in life and in death second question and answer? How can I experience this comfort because this comfort is not just something I want to know intellectually I want to experience it and the first thing you need to know is your misery you need to understand and stop avoiding Your misery now i'm not telling you not to go see movies when you're having a bad day i'm not I'm not a teetotaler. I think um alcohol is fine within moderation if this isn't something you have a problem with Um, I am not saying that it's it's not good to take a break and have a vacation and all that I'm not saying that but you you will not you will never know You will never know You'll never receive the comfort of not being your own unless and until You fully embrace Um the source of your problem, which is you that that you need to you know, why why? Why is it so bad to keep blaming everyone else? Well number one it's counterproductive because you can't do anything about every everyone else number two It's also blind because so many of our own problems are our own and so we need to begin to stop and say I am the fault of me And I am going to own this I am going to I am my worst enemies have other people hurt me. Yes But but where does the fault lie? It starts with me gk chesterton You know again, this is probably apocryphal. But what's problem with what's what's the problem with the world? I am So I need to acknowledge my misery. I need to own it. It's also for example, there's so much wisdom in a um step one, um Um, I empower um, I am powerless over alcohol and I need a higher power higher than myself to rescue me step one Um, you need to know how you are delivered now, obviously as christians we are delivered by the the the Incarnation the life the work the crucifixion the resurrection the ascension of jesus christ And then the second coming the apostle's creed Um gratitude then is the motivation for everything we do now. This is important because And and I appreciate peterson's dual things with his future authoring program I need to on one hand look at the goal in front of me and I also need to fear The hell I could become so you need heaven and hell and you need to live within that tension And I think peterson is right there. But but the problem with the problem with um The problem with this is a trap that That christians have long seen that if I achieve it i'll be self righteous And if I fail it i'll be too self blaming you need to somehow get that balance Right, and I think the way to do that is I think the heideberg catechism has that right in that it's Gratitude motivates us to move forward now. I've got dozens of my sermons online and if you would listen to enough of them You have my pity But if you listen to enough of them You'll notice that I almost always end every sermon in this way misery deliverance gratitude misery deliverance gratitude Because on one hand I don't want my congregation to be legalistic and say here are the rules and we have to obey them And therefore god will forgive me. No, that's not christianity. That's that's karma It's um, it's misery deliverance gratitude and this then keeps the christian work from being legalistic Because I don't finally earn my way to god But yet, you know to address hitchens complaint i'm filled with responsibility Um the neighbor who is sleeping literally against my door I I need to I cannot simply turn a blind eye the story of lazarus and the rich man continues to continues to haunt me but Gratitude must be my vote of motivation Peterson chapter two most individuals are dealing with one or more serious health problems while going productively and Uncomplainingly about their business if anyone is fortunate enough to be in a rare period of grace and health personally Then he or she typically has at least one close family member in crisis This is scott alexander's point yet people prevail and continue to to be um Continue to do difficult and ignore and Effortful tasks to hold themselves and their families together society together to me. This is miraculous so much of of that So much so that a dumbfounded gratitude is the only appropriate response So so in a sense what peterson has in chapter two is two-thirds of the heideberg catechism just like he in a sense has um half of creation fall redemption restoration He's he's got he's got good chunks of the picture But I think um, I think a full embrace Of the gospel would complete it people are so tortured by the limitations and And uh and constraint of being that i'm amazed they even act properly or look beyond themselves but enough do so that they have that we have central heat and running water and Infinite computational power and electricity and enough for everyone to eat and even the capacity to contemplate the fate of the broader society And nature and terrible nature, um nature terrible nature itself And i'm going to get a lot into nature when I get into cs lewis's miracles And and now not everybody has enough to eat and so the world still does fall short But peterson's point here I think is dead on right and and and I think we have again not an ideology Um and and not a broken religion you have to work both sides and some people in terms of my Identity as a calvinist say no, but aren't calvinists reductionistic now actually calvinists are Inconsistent because on one hand they want to say that that I am chosen and called by god completely apart from my works And on the other side I need to follow that narrow path I mean people say yeah, but the bible has both things and I say yeah, that's right. I'm a calvinist I I try to I try to believe what the bible says. Well, well it has both things and I say yeah, that's right So molinism is another way that they try to square the triangle. See I think the problem is that if you lose the sense of That this is delivered to you. You become self-righteous and if you and if you lose the sense of well Take up your cross and follow me. Well, well then you become lazy. So You know and again, you can listen to my my sermons on the solas to hear You know how I how I work this out So so you need to work both sides you need to focus on your deliverance anxiety leads to avoidance often. I think again Uh tim keller sermons do really good in terms of focusing on the gospel and actually, um, I was listening to philip carrey's philosophy and religion um great courses series and I think he really gets well the The differentiation between luther and calvinism and and and where this gospel thing goes and now So so tim keller is much more of the the english puritan tradition And i'm more of the dutch calvinist tradition and and tim keller is so good partly because he takes some really good stuff from luther He takes some good stuff from the puritan, but he also takes from the dutch calvinists. And so um Yeah, those would be a conversation i'd have with tim keller, but so you need to focus on your deliverance You need to see you need to again. This is the this is the conclusion It's the application of every tim keller sermon You need to see your god saving you if you're jean valjean you need to see the monsignor When the police take you to him because you've stolen the spoons You need to see the monsignor say and here are the candlesticks John valjean You don't know the grace that I have given you and once you see that grace your heart will be changed And you will want to do good That is the gospel and so you need to see that because if you don't see that then It's just legalism then you're begrudgingly working for god instead of saying lord You're beautiful and I want to give you what you have then when you see god in his beauty You're not there hiding yourself because you're trying to compete with god Then you're there submitting to him because what you really want to do is worship this god So you need to work both sides. You need to see your deliverance and then you need to practice gratitude Joy as motivation helps you not beat yourself up for the inevitable disappointment because again We live in the age of decay and all of the work you will do for the lord Will in this age seem to go to nowhere the hours I have spent with Alcoholics and drug abusers sitting in this chair talking to me about their misery sometimes I listen and I listen and And I walk away and I think lord have I done them any good? But What i'm working out of is the motivation of joy And and and I know that many of my efforts will fail well How can I keep doing these failing efforts that are still good? Because joy motivates me because it's the the vision of my beloved that draws me to do this And what actually we begin to see in matthew 25 and and I have this so often that when i'm looking at someone who is Who their life is a mess. I see exactly what peterson noted in that chapter. I see on one hand gosh Would I do as well as them if I was bipolar? Alcoholic living on the streets eating out of a dumpster. I don't know And so humanity is fallen royalty This from um rudolph steiner rhythm replaces strength and and so Okay So you're watching a youtube and and in the moment and you have this in church church You hear a sermon and you're all inspired But you know what there's a cat video next and there's a mortgage to pay and there's a soul crushing job to go to How you cannot live in inspiration you cannot live in You cannot live on this stuff. You are shaped more by your habits than your intentions and and peterson again as a good psychologist I'm gonna keep my eye on the time. Oh, i'm almost out of time is a good psychologist Gets into this you need habits you need to go to bed You need to get up you need to eat breakfast and and and a a always says it works if you work it But many many people It doesn't work for and and I get that and this is this is the mystery of grace now now You can't do it alone. You have to you have to find other people to be accountable to you A a says you have to confess Your shortcomings to another human being that's fundamental and the church has practiced this It's in the roman catholic tradition in the protestant tradition people unload themselves to their pastors all the time You have to and people do it willingly give them a chance and they'll say I have botched my life And I need someone to rescue me Is there possible anyone in all of existence that can rescue me? So my advice is use time against decay Um, you need a daily rhythm and as christians that's often prayer or devotions Um other traditions like the roman catholic doing the daily office. You need a weekly rhythm Lily being great saint of my church You can meet her if you come to the sunday school class or the worship service You you probably won't know who she is and to tell you start listening. She has a great saying she says get up dress up Show up. She's a diabetic who doesn't eat the donuts. She's a diabetic who goes to the gym She's a diabetic who cares for her children who are 20 30 years Younger than she is but but she cares for them still even if they drive her crazy Get up dress up show up and and people are like well, why go to church? Well, what are you going to do on sunday morning watch tv? You're going to go eat a donut at starbucks get up dress up show up go to church Get around some people who who will beginning get into number three get around some people who want the best for you Get around some people and start building relationships with these people get around some people that you can be accountable to get around Some people who are broken and fallen you can you will have to practice loving your enemy because sometimes these church people will make you crazy And now it's all still grace because you find lousy graceless evil church people who have said devotions all their lives You find them every day. They've heard sermons all their lives and you think they haven't heard a word of it A doesn't always work And which is the bible says seek the lord while he may be found call on him while he is near and so Cry out to jesus Well, i'm out of time. I gotta close this off. Thanks for listening. That's chapter two in peterson's book. Hope it was helpful