https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Jd2wv44OCUk

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I'm going to go through the status of my sermon as it is right now. Most of you have heard the idiom, the handwriting on the wall. Do you know where it comes from? I put it in Google and it seems like a fair number of people don't know where it comes from. Do you know what the idiom means when we say, well, you've got to read the handwriting on the wall? Take a moment, think about it. When I'm in front of my live audience, I'll probably get a little bit of feedback. Usually handwriting about the usual hand-wringing, not handwriting, I'm going to trip up on that on Sunday too, the usual hand-wringing about this is the loss of biblical literacy and it's true. With each successive generation, people know less and less about the Bible, but what we usually fail to notice is how deeply the Bible actually continues to inhabit our language and our thought. It is so built into us and so built into the language that we rarely consider it. We are in fact obtuse to ourselves and often that which is most obvious to everyone else feels like revelation to us. Now this is the story where this phrase comes from. King Belshazzar gave a great banquet for a thousand of his nobles and drank wine with them. While Belshazzar was drinking his wine, he gave orders to bring the gold and silver goblets that Nebuchadnezzar, his father, actually his grandfather, had taken from the temple in Jerusalem so that the king and his nobles, his wives and his concubines might drink from them. So they brought in the golden goblets that had been taken from the temple of God in Jerusalem, notice all the repetition, and the king and his nobles, his wine and his concubines drank from them. As they drank the wine, they praised the gods of gold and silver, of bronze, iron, wood and stone. Suddenly the fingers of a human hand appeared and wrote on the plaster of the wall. Near the lampstand in the royal palace, the king watched the hand as it wrote. His face turned pale and he was so frightened that his legs became weak and his knees were knocking. The king summoned the enchanters, astrologers and diviners. Then he said to these wise men of Babylon, whoever reads this writing and tells them what it means will be clothed in purple and have a gold chain placed around his neck and he will be made the third highest ruler in the kingdom. That's because Belshazzar himself was actually second because his father, not Nebuchadnezzar but Nebuchadnezzar's son, was in fact the head king of the country. The queen hearing the voices, actually the queen mother could have been one of Nebuchadnezzar's wives, the queen hearing voices of the king and his nobles came into the banquet hall. May the king live forever, she said. Don't be alarmed. Don't look so pale. There's a man in your kingdom who has the spirit of the holy gods in him. It's almost a direct quote from chapter four. And if you've been reading through the book, you see this pattern of the diviners can't answer the question. Daniel is brought in to answer the question and he is the one who has the spirit of the holy gods. And that's how Daniel is seen in the context of this polytheistic culture. In the time of your father, he was found to have insight and intelligence and wisdom like that of the gods. Your father, King Nebuchadnezzar, appointed him chief of magicians, enchanters, astrologers, and diviners. He did this because Daniel, whom the king called Belshazzar, was found to have a keen mind and knowledge and understanding and also the ability to interpret dreams, explain riddles, and solve difficult problems. Call for Daniel and he will tell you what the writing means. So Daniel was brought before the king and the king said to him, Are you Daniel, one of the exiles my father, the king brought from Judah? I have heard that the spirit of the gods is in you and that you have insight, intelligence, and outstanding wisdom. The wise men and enchanters were brought before you to read this writing and tell me what it means, but they could not explain it. Now I have heard that you are able to give interpretations and to solve difficult problems. If you can read this writing and tell me what it means, you will be clothed in purple and have a gold chain placed around your neck and you will be made third highest ruler in the kingdom. Now by this point, this whole routine should be getting old and it's getting especially old to Daniel. Then Daniel answered the king, You may keep your gifts for yourself and give your reward to someone else. Nevertheless, I will read the writing for the king and tell him what it means. Again, Daniel is the very best servant of unworthy tyrants. Your majesty, the most high God gave your father Nebuchadnezzar sovereignty and greatness and glory and splendor. Because of the high position he gave him, all the nations and peoples of every language dreaded and feared him. Those the king wanted to put to death, he put to death. Those he wanted to spare, he spared. Those he wanted to promote, he promoted. And those he wanted to humble, he humbled. Nebuchadnezzar was like a god upon the earth. But when his heart became arrogant and hardened with pride, he was disposed from his royal throne and stripped of his glory. He was driven away from people and given the mind of an animal. He lived with the wild donkeys and ate grass like the ox and his body was drenched with the dew of heaven until he acknowledged that the most high God is sovereign over all kingdoms on earth and sets over them anyone he wishes. That's basically a summary of chapter four. But you, Belshazzar, his son, have not humbled yourself, though you knew all this. Instead, you have set yourself up against the Lord of heaven. You had the goblets from his temple brought to you. You and your nobles, your wives, and your concubines drank wine from them. You praise the gods of silver and gold, of bronze, of iron, wood and stone, which cannot see or hear or understand. But you do not honor the God who holds in his hand your life and all your ways. Notice who God is and what he does and what he holds in his hand. Therefore he sent the hand that wrote the inscription. This is the inscription that was written. Meanie, Meanie, Tekil, Parson. Here is what these words mean. Meanie. God has numbered the days of your reign and brought it to an end. Tekil. You have been weighed on the scales and found wanting. Perez. Your kingdom is divided and given to the Medes and Persians. Then at Belshazzar's command, Daniel was clothed in purple, a gold chain was placed around his neck, and he was proclaimed third highest ruler in the kingdom. Not for long. That very night Belshazzar, king of the Babylonians, was slain. And Darius the Mede took over the kingdom at the age of 62. Handwriting on the wall. Belshazzar saw handwriting on the wall, and what's amazing is that he couldn't see himself. Life was kind of disconnected from him and what the handwriting on the wall was, what anyone else with clear eyes could see, but it was he himself couldn't see it. Now, in contrast to this, or maybe in alignment with this, I want to play a little clip from a pastor of the United Church of Canada who became an atheist. And this is a conference for atheist pastors who, some of them have transitioned out of their jobs, some of them continue to keep their churches as she does and try to pastor an atheist church. And this is her story. And as we listen to it, I want you to think about handwriting on the wall. Thank you. It's an honor and a privilege to be with you today and to be able to share a bit of the story. I am indeed a pastor in a United Church of Canada congregation. It's not a congregation that has been taken out of a mainline denomination, but one that continues to exist within the United Church of Canada. It's in the city of Toronto, a congregation which this year is celebrating its 65th anniversary. I've been there for 18 years. About 15 years ago, a colleague of mine, while on a Habitat for Humanity build in another province, was caught in a hurricane with his two-year-old son in his arms. His son was torn from his arms and killed during that hurricane. I heard about that and so went searching on the internet for something about the information that I could learn, and the headline that came up was a picture of a family with a child and the headline, God took care of us. And that was the last straw, because I could no longer use the word God to describe what I meant and allow it to be understood to mean what so many other people mean. In other words, she had her own definition of God, and now her definition of God is in contrast with other definitions of God, and so she's going to set this straight. Wikipedia definition of God. My definition of God, since I had been very young, was about love. It was about creating something very sacred between you and I. It was about making sure that I didn't just use people and that I allowed myself to build relationships with them that meant that they would honor my integrity and they would not just use me. It was about trying to build that relationship in the world, a world that was so in need of compassion and justice and caring and beauty. And so my ministry grew out of that, and I used the word God to describe that. But over the course of a few years in ministry, I clued into the fact that nobody had any idea what I was talking about. And I worried about that. I didn't really understand why that was happening. A colleague and I actually had a conversation about it one time, and the next Sunday when I sat down at the front of my congregation and I opened my bulletin, I realized everything I said in that 20 minutes of preaching, during which I did what I had been taught in theological college, where I learned that the Bible was a human construction. I was taught to take the Bible passage for the week apart, to talk about the socio-political economic environment in which it had grown out of, who wrote it, why they wrote it, who they wrote it for, why the context of that piece had absolutely nothing to do with today. And then I'd find some little thing and I'd build some moral something around it. But no one heard any of that because I wrapped it entirely in traditional sounding prayers, Oh God in your mercy, hear our prayer. We sang hymns that held up this idea of Jesus that would conquer the world. And we spoke in language that reinforced the idea of an interventionist supernatural deity that was going to, if nothing else, be the only and sole source of our strength. So I realized that something had to give, but I didn't know what. So I pondered it for a little while. And that's when the hurricane took place. So one Sunday, unprepared, those of you who have been clergy know that things happen and you don't get a sermon done for the Sunday. And most clergy, if that happens, they've got a drawer, they pull out a file of a sermon they haven't preached in a few years or they preached at another church. I don't write my sermons. I didn't have a drawer. So the service unfolded and when it came to the time when I was supposed to preach, I stood up and I completely deconstructed God. I talked about how I couldn't possibly believe in an interventionist God, that I couldn't abide that there but for the grace of God go I statement. That I could no longer talk about a supernatural realm that would or would not in break into hours in order to adjust natural events. That I didn't believe that you and you and you didn't stand with courage and strength coming out of your own self and not from some other place. At the end of that sermon, I think it was that sermon, was the moment that I realized things had changed forever. I sat down, picked up my bulletin and realized the next thing, the intercessory prayers. I had to stand and say, oh God in your mercy, and they had to respond, you're our prayer. But after that service, I got more hugs than I had ever had in my entire life as a clergy. Not because people were going, yes, we totally believe that. They thought I'd had some kind of a psychotic break. But I knew that I had stepped over a line. And so I met with the chair of my board and we called a board meeting and we had the conversation. And I said, I just can't do this anymore. I thought I'd had, I was in the middle of a spiritual crisis, but I recognize now it was a leadership crisis. My beliefs hadn't changed at all. I just realized I couldn't lead anymore like that. And so they said, okay, tell us what it's going to look like. Where are we going? And I said, I haven't got a clue. I don't know. And they said, okay, let's go. 15 years later, we're still transitioning that congregation, but I think we've got it pretty good now. For the first little while, people were all on board moving along, very supportive until shortly after my first book, With or Without God, Why the Way We Live is More Important Than What We Believe was published, we finally took the Lord's Prayer out. That had been a long time. We lost 50% of the congregation when we did that. Why? Why? I thought everyone was on board. What's happening in this story? Where was the handwriting on the wall? What was revealed? What God was revealed? Thank you. Now, let's look at Belshazzar Scott a little bit. One of the things that jumps out in the first few verses here is how much wine pops up. And actually Belshazzar, from other ancient sources, had a reputation for, he was actually the crown prince and he was a bit of a playboy. And what we know is that his kingdom is crumbling around him. And what's he doing? He's having a party. Eat, drink, and be merry for tomorrow you die, or maybe later on that evening. His God, well, he was an interventionist God, almost everyone in the ancient world was, but he just, you know, get the goblets out of Jerusalem. Maybe that God will help us. So maybe we'll just drink ourselves into the death that is to come. And here's the irony about alcohol. Alcohol is a way that diminishes your awareness. And so in some ways Belshazzar looks at the God of distraction or the God of dissipation. In some ways he's the younger son of the, he's the prodigal son who, you know, he wastes his life in wantonness. See, we are idol makers. We make God out of what we want God to be. And what's amazing about Greta Vosper's little speech there is he had her very own definition of God. And she reached a certain point where she realizes it was just her own personal God. And the dissonance that should have been there with reading out of the Bible and using the liturgy that had been passed down even in the United Church of Canada. All of this happening, she didn't realize the dissonance. And then suddenly for her with the hurricane and the death of her friend's son and the fact that other Christians are saying God saved my son. Well, this was the handwriting on the wall. Now suddenly it was revelation and everything needed to change. The world needed to conform to her God because she suddenly realized she was never actually following through with her God. And she was going to lead the entire congregation on this journey. And at first the congregation's like, well, yeah, let's go. But when they take out the Lord's Prayer, half of the church realizes, oh. And you begin to get the sense of how we live. We are sleepy, obtuse, disconnected people who aren't really very in touch with what's going on. And that's exactly Belshazzar. And Daniel comes in and says, yeah, the handwriting on the wall. Everyone in Babylon knows you're a worthless playboy. Everyone in Babylon knows that your kingdom is collapsing all around you and you are partying it up, ironically, with the wine and goblets from the temple that you destroyed in Jerusalem. Can you not see the dissonance? Can you not see the contrasts here? And then you see how Belshazzar, Gretta Vosper, eventually with the hurricane and the death of her friend's son and how others were saying, God saved my child, saw the contrast and said, my God does not make choices. My God is just about, well, my is the functional element of that phrase, my God. Because you have defined God and now what you are doing is promoting your vision of God to the world. And that may be a very comfortable thing. But at some point you might want to pause and say, if there is a God, maybe I should try to figure out what that God actually is like and is and who he is. It's usually the traumas of life that reveal the fact that we've been trying to obliterate the real God in favor of the one we assert. And so we cover it up with wine and amusements and escapism and whatever works to make us less conscious. And what so often we realize is that we have the God as faulty insurance. And I will discard the idea of an interventionist God because tragedies happen to some and not to others, often contrary to my evaluation of the worthiness of divine favor. My friend was a good man and these other despicable people, their son was saved and my friend's son was lost. My God is one of justice who would not let that happen. So therefore, there is not a God. Bad things happen to people I regard as good and worthy and good things happen to people that I regard as being unworthy of the blessings they have received. The God we really believe in is espoused as being false. What if I was loyal and obedient? This is the implicit belief. What if I was loyal and obedient? Then God would run the world as I saw fit. But when events destroy your ability to believe that, what will you do? Belshazzar can't see or read, so he doubles down in his usual defense. Oh, money. Let's buy the answer from someone. And Daniel says, you can keep the money. It's way, way past that. But I'm more than happy to tell you exactly what's going to happen. Notice the contrast about Daniel talking to Belshazzar and Daniel talking to Nebuchadnezzar. Nebuchadnezzar, the one who destroyed the temple in Jerusalem. The contrast here are just alarming and startling. But we do the same thing. Greta Vosper always trusted that individual relationships were God. Well, why were you calling it God? Because that was your God. What will she do when people fail her? What will she call those relationships? Satan? Here is the perpetual human dilemma. You are not God and neither am I. You didn't make the world and you don't run it and it doesn't follow your rules. That's just true. And it's always been true. How will you respond? A lot respond in Belshazzar's way. A lot respond in Greta Vosper's way. Well, I'm angry with this God, so I'm going to get back at this God by telling him he isn't real. Does God know what it's like to lose a son? Well, think about the Christian story. Not just to the winds of chaos, but to the evil of people's plans to improve the world according to their religious and political dreams. When Jesus is faced with what should look like injustice, does he deconstruct the Father? He says, my God, my God, why have you forsaken me? He's ready to lament. He's ready to complain. He's ready to quote Psalm 22. He's free to cry out to God in his pain. He's free to appeal his situation. But does he say, I'm so mad at you, I'm going to get back at you by saying you don't exist? That's just petulance. Or does he finally say, into your hands, I commit my spirit? I don't know what's happening to me. I feel I am strained to imagine I can trust you in the midst of all this, but trust you, I will continue to do. That is the Son on the Cross. Face the facts in your world. Don't drink them away. Don't make yourself your own God. Why? Because you're a lousy God. Nobody else is bowing down to worship you. Don't worship yourself in the mirror. You don't have enough power and your fellow godlings won't be great allies. Trust me. When the chips are down, most of them are going to be in it for themselves because they have their own gods as themselves too. And it doesn't work. And it's lonely. You can feel all good when you're all together, when things are good, but when bad times come, it's everyone for themselves. What's amazing in Greta Vosper's story is look at the old language. Why did this language develop? It survived for a reason, just like the phrase, the handwriting on the wall. Why did that get so much resonance that people who don't even know that the Bible have never even read it still have the phrase? The language endured for a reason. Maybe she should doubt her capacity to be God or to define God herself. And imagine that maybe she could learn something from that book that she promised to steward. Reach out and wait. Learn to trust. Look at the prayer that was the watershed moment for her. With these words, he taught us to pray. Our father who worked in heaven, hallowed be your name. Your kingdom come, your will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. Forgive us our deaths as we forgive our debtors and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever. The same man who cried out, My God, my God, why have you forsaken me? Teaches us to pray this prayer. What will you do in remembrance of him? Will you take his body? Will you take his blood? Will you be his witnesses in this world where everyone wants to be their own God?