https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=BKa4MVSQqoE

 All right, sorry about the delay this morning. For some reason, we can't get the audio in. We can't get all the audio straight. So what that means is we're streaming, but I can't hear the Discord room. So that's going to be the compromise for not having it all worked out this morning. And hopefully by next week, we'll have it straight. So sorry for the wait. Thanks for hanging around. I guess what that means is that the Discord people can talk amongst themselves. That would probably be a little distracting. But I am reading the questions from the questions for PVK. Holy cow. Oh, wow. This is going to be kind of a mess. I have to figure this out because I have my marker from last week. Oh, shoot. No, I'm lost. Karl Barth. That was the question. Yep. OK, I'm OK. All right, I'm going to start with Phil Nickerson's question from the 1st of November. Hello, Paul. How much have you been influenced by Karl Barth? I am a day one of reading about him and I'm seeing all kinds of connections between his thinking and yours. God number one versus God number two, free will versus agency, objective versus subjective belief, faith, agent and arena, natural theology and revelation. Wow, Phil, you should let me know what you're reading because I'd be really curious to see what you're reading. I have so when I went through Calvin Seminary, Karl Barth was a dirty name. And if you wanted to start study Karl Barth, you had to travel an hour towards the Big Lake to Western Seminary, where they like teaching Karl Barth. I had a systematics professor named Fred Kloster, who used to love telling the story about how he once gave Karl Barth a drive to the airport. But neo-Orthodoxy was by no means in Calvin Seminary as cherished as good old fashioned orthodoxy. So even though once for 100 bucks I was able to pick up Karl Barth's magnum opus and it sits on my study shelves, I know relatively little about him. I do understand though, where in some ways my thinking might also have some parallels to neo-Orthodoxy, because in many ways what Karl Barth and I are dealing with is the same thing, which is the height of modernity and skepticism about things like divine revelation. So that makes sense. So shoot me a note somehow and a comment, because you're a good faithful comment leaver, especially in other old conversations. Let me know what you're reading of Barth that made you relate some of the stuff that I'm doing with what you knew of him. So I'd be curious about that. And again, part of the problem of our audio problem this morning is I can't ask for, normally I would just ask you in the Discord to tell me, and you would tell me and it would all be streamed, but I can't hear them. So that's what we're missing out on. So now this is sort of like a monologue video live. And I'm not going to look at the chat. Last night, some of you saw that I tried just live streaming from my computer here in the office and it went well. We might do more of those kinds of things. Colton Kirby, hey, Paul, this is not really a question. I just wanted to say that, at least for me, your lack of marketing and the fact that you are a bad YouTuber increases your appeal. This may not be the case for most. It's definitely the case for me. I get tired of how most all YouTube channels beg you, like and subscribe. And I wanted to let you know that not everyone is turned off by your lack of professionalism. You hear that, Rick? Huh, Rick, Rick? Huh? How about that? Rick says, yeah, yeah, yeah. Rick still has ambitions for me. He confronted me this morning about my my lack of ambition. So what would Jordan Peterson say? Leaving all that potential on the table. All right. Falmoton, hello, Paul. There's been a lot of talk about what spirit Pnuma is, as well as principalities and powers in this corner of the Internet. What do you think a soul is? Psyche. So if you had asked me a year ago, I would have said a story. In now, that's a very metaphorical answer, because I think there is. I'll say it this way. A story in the mind of God. That's what I would have said a year ago, too. And in the same way, a story is contained in a book. A story is contained in us. But if you burn a book, you burn a book. Yes. But if you burn a book, the story itself is not destroyed because the story exists in a different, even different plane, if you will. And that's why you can't find a soul in your body physically. But all of this is sort of prompted by some of the issues that Cartesian dualism tried to address, because once you had Cartesian dualism, you had the mind-body problem in a way that you didn't have it before. I've got three very interesting conversations coming out in the channel. I'll try and get them all out next week if I can. One of them was with Greg, I almost said Hernandez, but Enriquez. Greg Enriquez, who's been talking to John Vervecky. And that was an interesting conversation in a lot of different ways. I think it goes a little over two hours. And I think those of you who stick it out through the whole way will find it to be very interesting in a lot of different ways. But it gets into this mind-body problem, the problem of psychology that Greg likes asking about. Greg will talk a little bit about his own religious practice, which grew out of his rejection of a once adopted Sam Harris atheism. So, yeah, it was a very stimulating conversation that I had with Greg. And it really provoked me to do some thinking about some things. And I think he will upset and even anger some of you, which will be very interesting to watch. So what is the soul? I think in many ways, the soul is the part of me that exists in the mind of God. Now, God is certainly the creator and master of materiality. This stuff gets really deep, really fast. And, you know, as we as we sort of struggle with this Cartesian dualism and some of the implications and part of part of what happens on this side of Cartesian dualism is that materiality is somehow bereft of God. And that's not true. And so when my conversation with Greg Enriquez, one of the things I challenged him with, if, if, in fact, this whole cluster of responses to the developments in the medieval period is an attempt to recalibrate the relationship between mind and matter, between spirit and flesh. And the end of modernity is, again, a period where we radically need to recalibrate in some ways in the other direction, the relationship between mind and matter and spirit and flesh, mind and body. But Cartesian dualism did was sort of exile God to God, number two land, exile God to mind and spirit from materiality. And so the. The miracles of Jesus are in some ways. The proper recalibration, revelation or the revelation of the proper calibration between the two. And of course, the incarnation and the resurrection are in many ways. Sacramental elements of both creation and new creation. So you're you know, you're barking up the big tree here. But you with asking a question like this, you can provoke me to talk for an hour because it just gets me thinking out loud on these things, which is what my channel is about. So it's a great question. And I hope that that little sample is satisfying for now. Zetusa, hi, Paul. And the last question and answer, you mentioned the distinction between the matter verse and the story verse. Yeah, that's what I'm talking about now. I've seen something similar being described in the Peterson Peugeot conversation where Peterson gets all emotional. That's right. Because what Peterson wants to know is if that's that's exactly. That's exactly the point where he he wants to know if the story verse can move the matter verse. He wants to know if Jesus can stand up in a boat and say, peace, be still. Because if he can, what does that mean? He wants to know if Roman soldiers can kill a man dead, not mostly dead, but dead, dead and have that man walk out of a tomb. Because that's that's why miracle for really forever, but especially for modernity, is the key line of demarcation. Because what what the recalibration did was basically say, we're going to shut the door on miracle. And if we shut the door on miracle, we enforce the boundary between the matter verse and the story verse. That's what the Enlightenment did. And that's still the the line that individuals like Sam Harris patrol and won't give up in the problem that they have. Is that each of us, as C.S. Lewis mentions, every time I lift my hand, I put it in the camera and I wiggle my fingers. I have just traversed the story verse and the matter verse. Now, because I do so in my body. Is no big deal to us because we all do it. But the story verse is collective. So when a politician says something and everybody either applauds or puts up their fist in resistance or tries to shout the politician down. Well, now that line we cross all the time. But that's why Sam Harris boils it down to, well, if I pray, what's happening? If I pray, what's happening? So that's that's where the line is. And that's why Jesus got all that attention doing miracles. And when he was doing the miracles, he would say to the crowd, you're not in any way understanding what's going on here. And that's why it provokes what he says in Matthew, Matthew 11 and 12, when he says things like, it'll be better for Sodom and Gomorrah on the day of judgment than it will be you, Capernaum. Thank you, ABC. Had a question and it got posted. All right. I'm going to have to keep going. Even though you ask questions, you ask me questions like this and it just, you trigger me and you, you, you, it's a, it's a verbal PVK laxative. Yeah. Grizz and y'all are going to meme that one to death. You know, questions like this are, are what move my channel because this, this is where the line is because we want to see, we want to see death. We want to see death undone. We want to see the age of decay end. And when Jesus walks out of the tomb, that's what that means. And yeah, you can devolve it into, oh, that just means spring. But CS Lewis again, got this correct. Yeah. Spring is an example of that. Every time a grain, every time a seed falls in the earth, that's sort of a picture of that, but this is what we're talking about. Okay. Sorry. You didn't even, I haven't even gotten to the question. Maybe, maybe we'll have to, maybe we'll see if there's a setting here in this, um, PVK questions for PVK that you can limit things to 280 characters or 200 characters, just like, just like the Google, Google chat room. I'll try to keep moving. I've seen something similar being described in the Peterson show. That's right. Because it's exactly where Peterson thing. I've been using the term teleology and ontology to explain what I think you were referring to, but I have no clue what the official theological jargon is. I've had an inclination that it has something to do with the tele, um, theology, theology versus economy distinction. I've never been able to succinctly grasp any distinction conceptually to know whether or not I'm right. I just know what it means. Theoretically God's inner life ontology. Ontology is the study of being. Um, there's, um, Oh, what's his name? He just de-converted from Christianity. He has a really nice video that I played a while ago, which is how to understand the history of philosophy in 30 minutes. And it's, it's a really good video. So ontology is a study of being. Um, I actually, we go through, I go through some of this with the Greg Hernandez video coming up. So that might shed some light on it. Are there any resources you can point me to? Wish I could remember his name right now. I've heard you mentioned that barfield described something. So, well, barfield, barfield, you start wading into barfields. Is not an easy way to figure out what on earth he's talking about. I don't know where to begin. I also heard Bart, it seemed to be big on God being hidden versus God works revealed. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. In terms of the, the Peterson-Pageot divide though, in some ways, one of the big, what, one of the things that the enlightenment did was, you know, the things that the enlightenment did was draw a line in the sand between people who believe God can raise the dead and those who are skeptical. And it has everything to do with this, the matter verse and the story verse. And of course, magic plays on this as well. I mean, part of what fascinates people about Harry Potter are verbal spells. Okay. It's the same thing in the matrix. It's the same line in some ways because they cross over into the cyber world where they can jump over buildings and do all these things because that's, that's in a sense, the thought world. So I've been talking about this in terms of registers. There's mind matter or there's mind above matter below spirit above flesh below. Heaven above earth below mind, physics, all that. That's the same line. And it's the, it's the union of heaven and earth. Once we start thinking so that, that, that Jonathan Sacks video that, that I've mentioned in some recent videos that Job sent me was really important there because that that's trading on exactly the same thing, because when we get into language and words, like I said, you can take a book and you can burn it, but burning the book does not destroy the story. You can take a person and kill them, but killing Martin Luther King Jr. or Jesus did not destroy the story. But the story continues to need a host. Well, where is that host? Well, you can find the remnants of that host and materiality. But what if God decides not to forget? Jesus points this out directly when he notes that, well, God kept Abraham and Isaac and Jacob alive. Now God also has the power to reinstantiate them in the flesh, if he so chooses, and in fact, the resurrection is that, but the resurrection is a looping up to a universe without decay. Now, another one of the conversations coming out this week is another very interesting one that I had with a guy from middle America who has sort of developed this idea, which I can't wait to bring it out to the channel because y'all are going to be picking at this and hating it and playing with it. Cause it's just such a fun play toy. He calls it fall on earth creationism. And I have to wait to release the video until he wants to put together a paper that people can read a little bit more because he's actually written a book on it because he's trying to deal with the science, the science Bible problem. And there's, there's a host of problems immediately. I see with his theory, but it's a fun idea to start to sort of twist the mind and get us playing it's very provocative. So that, that will be coming out. All right. I should keep moving. Christian golden. Hey, pastor Paul, I belong to a non-denominational evangelical Pentecostal church of sort, sort of church. We believe in among other things, the continuance and availability of the gifts of the spirit. I find myself however, gravitating more and more towards much simpler yet deeper Christ and him crucified faith. I don't know if, I don't know if that's the distinction. Not that I don't believe in the continuance of the gifts, but it seems that the message of Christ and him crucified often gets neglected in the favor of the more striking manifest supernatural experiences that is exactly or that that's very much the issue of Jesus in the Galilee. So if you, if you read, so Jesus has the portion of his ministry in the Galilee and then the portion of his ministry in Jerusalem, if you pay close attention, especially in the synoptics, but also in John of Jesus in the Galilee, you'll see that Jesus is doing miracles and people are all over the place. They're all excited about the miracles. Of course they're excited about the miracles. Miracles get our attention because of this line. And then Jesus keeps telling them, I'm doing this in front of you. You should understand what this means, but you're simply distracted and committed to one might say things below, not things above. Now, part of the problem is when we say that in a post Greek world, we think things above means drift up from things below. No, because all of the businesses, thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. The entire story of the Bible is the relationship between things above and things below. And when Jesus is doing miracles, he's basically announcing to the world, I am God, I am the master. I am, I am the author of this creation and I am the portal through which you will get to creation 2.0. That is who Jesus is and what he does. And along with a whole bunch of other things. So you're right in that when people don't fundamentally understand why miracles, they can get lost and distracted. And it happens all the time. It happened in Galilee, continues to happen some places today. Sort of emphasis moving just the milk towards the meat, exercising the gifts of the spirit, according to the leader. See, and so you have Jesus as wonder worker, Jesus as miracle worker, but Jesus is also crucified. And if you read the story of Jesus arrest and trial and crucifixion carefully, these points are emphasized. Just go back in history and look at how many, how many battles weren't determined by bad weather, just look at, um, just look at the Greek Persian Persian, Persian wars, if you can still a storm, you can make a storm, right? It's that sort of analogous to if you can kill somebody, well, you can kill somebody, but not raise them. But if you can raise them from the dead, you can kill them with a word. And so it's in some ways preposterous to imagine Jesus being arrested. But yet he is. How could he be arrested when, again, if you can say to the, the, the corpse of the widow of the widow of name, get up. If you can say to a little girl, get up out of death, you can say to a Roman soldier. Die. And in fact, in the gospel of John, when Jesus says, I am he, and they all fall back, that's, that's a, that's, that's a nod to his power and the whole business about, okay, take a sword. Well, he's setting them up and then, okay, I'm going to use my sword. And Jesus is like, no, you're not going to do that. I want, I want the entire drama here to show you exactly what this drama is about. Because human beings rule this world by death. This is exactly what Renee Girard was talking about. We rule this world by death. We use the tools of Satan. Thank you, Job. Discrete technical difficulty fund discord. And it's also the Rick exercise fund, especially because I can't hear him today at all, so he's, he's got to walk across the massive campus of living stones to get to me, um, where was I? Yeah. So Jesus crucifixion. So we rule this world by death. The mob does governments do. And that's exactly what Paul says. The government has given the sword and there's some real ambiguity there between. So when Jesus talks to the devil and the devil says, I rule this world. If you understand Renee Girard, then I only understand them a little bit. What, what basically I think Renee Girard is right in interpreting that of saying, this is all the devil's power. And Jesus says, I will not use the devil's instrument to rule this world. And that's something that the Anabaptists get deeply right. So, and that's a tension in the magisterial segments of the church, especially the Constantinian Roman segments of the church that lots of, lots of ways through this. But, but Jesus says, I will not use the use the devil's tools to rule this world. I can kill Roman soldiers with a word and I will not use that word. CS Lewis, the beginning of the magician's nephew that grabbed my imagination when I was a kid, the deplorable word. And it's, and I heard that in the book and it's like, I wonder what that word word is because Janice uses the deplorable word to destroy worlds. And, and so then as a kid, it's like, is there a word out there that if you, you say the word worlds will be destroyed. It's, it's comparable to, to Thanos's clicking his fingers. So no, this is, this is, this is along the lines of all of this. Milk to me. Meat is our skin in the game. Milk imagines that we can rule this world by electing Christian politicians. Now don't get me wrong. I want better politicians, better, I want better politicians. I'd like Christian politicians. I would like the government to reflect Christian values. I think that's good. I think it's healthy. I think it's productive. I think all of that is true. But if you think the age of decay can be banished by that, you are seriously misunderstanding. So in a sense thinking that, well, we're going to fix this world by, you know, by, by managing all of this stuff. No, it needs resurrection. And so managing stuff is the milk. Jesus crucified is the meat. You got that right. All right, Richard, I think we're good. I haven't asked you a pastoral question for a while, but I kind of need one right now. Okay. I'm prepping for a very important period in my life right now with college, just a few months away, along with what comes the busy-ness that is quite staggering. That has caused a lot of good old fashioned evangelical lessons I learned in Christian elementary and high school to come back to my mind. I wanted to pray, but I never do. I've wanted to read the word more than a chapter in a book. I've wanted to read the Bible. Read the word more than a chapter a night, but I never do. God isn't the center of my life to draw on some phrase I learned growing up. How can I focus on God? What do you think happens if I don't? The second question is easier. You just sort of drift along following the peers around you, the ideas in your movies, you just, you know, in Dominican Republic, I'd talk about, you know, coconuts because I lived in the Caribbean and there's coconuts around, you know, a coconut on the water, it just drifts along. It is not being, it is not being possessed by a spirit that moves against the tide. You know, you got burn powers out there with the name of his channel, the anadromist, it's this fish that swims upstream. Um, how can you focus on God? Well, you can employ discipline, self-discipline. You can build up your muscles, your spiritual muscles in a sense of saying, okay, I am going to adopt spiritual practices that lead me into greater strength. And you can read Richard Foster's, a celebration of discipline. You can look at the Dallas Willard, Reno Vare materials. You can meet some monastics. You can start working the daily office. There's many, many, many tools. One of the key things that will probably help you though, is if you do so in community, because if you have two or three or four others that are doing it with you, it's not unlike if you want to go to a gym, so a few years ago, a gym opened at a reasonable price, not very far from our house. And so Jared, who's, you know, my son, who's most closely connected with this channel and the meetup, you know, we, the whole family signed up at the gym. And if I could go with Jared or with my wife or with my wife and Jared, if a whole bunch of us went together, we went to the gym regularly. And then the gym had a manager who was basically giving away memberships for almost nothing, which is why we all signed up. And then the, uh, the, the owners of the gym chain closed it because it wasn't making any money because they all signed us up dirt cheap, but it's in, it was in one of the sketchiest blocks of this neighborhood. It's just all full of drug dealers and junkies and homeless people. So I can understand why it struggled, but you need people to go along with you. And I think going to a Christian college, which I know you're looking at some of them, that will help you because you will be able to find other people who are interested in spiritual discipline and in committing with you to follow those spiritual disciplines. So go for it. The other thing, so it's kind of like the Jordan Peterson self-authoring program. I mean, cause Peterson self-authoring program both wants to write a story about what if you succeed, but then also what if you fail? And there's both of those in this and that on one hand, find a group of people, make a commitment, hold each other accountable. You can go a long ways with that. How about the negative side? Well, you're going to go to college and college is a, a stressful next step for a lot of people, because now suddenly you're going to have to have self-discipline about studying and managing your time because you're going to be surrounded. I loved college. I went to Calvin college and I loved it. I was surrounded by people my own age. We had a great degree of commonality. We had an entire building full of women next door. All, you know, instead, you know, the women I grew up with were my sisters, of course, and other girls in school. And that was, you know, maybe 40, 50 women. And, you know, you had 200 women in the dorm connected to yours. And it was like, Holy cow. I mean, talk about a massive distraction. Um, and on and on and on and on and on. So you will also fail and you will suffer. And I'll tell you one thing, the discipline and all of those good things about beginning to get a muscular Christian life. All that is good, but I'll tell you, nothing will, nothing will grow you up faster in Christ than suffering and failure. So, and you'll get both. So the, uh, the good news is that you'll grow. The bad news is that you will suffer in order to grow. And there's the Christian life. Prophet Zacharias, my favorite book of the old Testament is Ecclesiastes. I love the book of Ecclesiastes. I'm a big fan of noir and neo noir films in films. If it's true, we should look at the Bible as a wide variety of genres and themes. I tend to read this book in that light. I picture the preacher teacher cough, King Solomon cough, standing under a street light, lighting a lamp, yeah, narrating over it. Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's great. I love it. I love it. Uh, Luke put a, Luke put a link to, uh, Paul. This is, this is this mega huge YouTuber named Paul, not me, obviously. Um, and he has this, he's just sitting around talking with his posse. And there was this dude who is supposedly making maybe as maybe as in all kinds of money from poker and, you know, he's just like this Uber Chad, um, this torpedo, what did, what did Chris Williams say? A torpedo weapon? I don't remember what it was. Um, but, and this guy talking about how basically he got to the end of pleasure and he found it empty. And I thought, yeah, except for all the cussing and body language and stuff that people don't react too well in church. There's the book of Ecclesiastes right there. Only that guy didn't have as much wisdom. So great point. All right, Jason D. Hi Paul. Love your videos. I've been looking on the discord for years. First question. Wow. Matthew 22, the Sadducees seek to trip Jesus up, remarriage at the resurrection. In verse 29, Jesus gives an interesting response. You do not know the scriptures. He then gives an answer that seemingly does not appear in any books of, um, in any books that, that we Christians outside of Ethiopia recognize as scripture. It does appear in first Enoch 15, three to seven. Then Jude quotes directly from first Enoch and alludes to first Enoch on numerous occasions together with first and second Peter. Also the early church fathers seemed very familiar with first Enoch. Some arguing for its inclusion in the canon. Does Jesus use first Enoch in the first Enoch? Does first Enoch and Matthew 22 not suggest, not suggest that first Enoch should be regarded as scripture. There's a good argument. Church has been, Protestants don't like to admit it, but church has been arguing about canon for a long time about the fringes. And I don't know why Protestants shouldn't admit it. Luther called the epistle of James an epistle of straw. Luther tried to jigger with the canon too. And Protestants did jigger with the canon with the, um, you know, why Catholics have fatter Bibles. So yeah, maybe 500 years from now, first Enoch will be a hot book in, uh, mega church, mega churches on the surface of Mars. Bang. Think about that. There's a video for you, by the way, Gavin Palmer, myself, and a former guest of Karen Wong's, the meaning code, have entered a team challenge for Elon Musk's climate change X prize. If we win, we will try to secure Elon as a guest of a random on your show. You know, Hey, you know, if Freddie can talk to Kanye, uh, Grizzly, Grizzly, this, this rapper that Freddie knows, I can talk to Elon on my channel. I'll look straight into the camera. Elon, if you want to come on, I'll think about it. If you give me a Tesla and a charger and some solar panels, you're in there. Peak Freddie. Oh no, Job, Rick to Rick to do 10 pushups. Lance Cleaver technical taco relief fund ABC. Another five bucks. Wow. Thank you guys. Yeah. You're, you know, you're, you're just, you're just making Rick's heart warm with these cause Rick's like, see Paul, see Paul, if we do better, you can make more money. Rick's Rick's worried Rick's worried because what if my little church goes under Rick's word that if my little church goes under, where's Rick going to go to church? Rick's like, I don't know. Some jump church would love to have me run their stream on Sunday morning. That is very true. That is very true. All right. Christian reform church is headquartered in Grand Rapids, Michigan. It indeed is the Amway corporation is also in court in Grand Rapids, Michigan. It indeed is. And those two are not disconnected. The two men, Javin Andel and Rich DeVos grew up in the Christian reform church. Why isn't Vanderclay better at a pyramid scheme? Ah, don't you see me? Don't you see me working my pyramid scheme? I'm trying to get randos united and grim gris and Mark and Chad, the alcoholic and, and, um, and Chris Pacow, you know, up past a thousand. And then once they all get monetized at a thousand subs, then I'm going to lean it and say, it would be a terrible thing if something would happen to that little channel that you love so much. It's all my New Jersey mob instincts. So, um, yeah, I'm just running a grand pyramid scheme here. I'm just waiting for my underlings to level up and then I'll say, well, I'll tell you what, I'll keep promoting your channel gris if you have channels under you, but they pay up to you and you pay up to me. Oh, now I got Rick out of his chair. Oh, I don't know what I did. Rick's leaving. No, he took off his coat. Rick took off. Oh, he's doing his pushups. You call those pushups? It's Rick's in charge of VMAX. Otherwise I'd share the camera that's on him. Okay. Um, I distracted myself. Both Amways founders were raised in the CRC and attended Calvin College. That's indeed true. I think they dropped out though. Rich men drop out of college because if you've got instincts for getting rich, you very quickly realize this is a waste of time. What's the relationship of Dutch Calvinism to Amway? This person's dead now, so I can tell the story. After I came to the church 24 years ago, a member of the church said to me, pastor, I've got to meet with you. Oh, okay. Well, you know, I go to work at such and such time so we can meet early in the morning. Well, absolutely. I'm your pastor. I'm going to let's sit down and find out what's wrong. And usually I get a call like that. It's he's had a fight with his wife and his wife says, I want to divorce you. Or he's had an affair or, you know, he's, he's been in a relationship with Or, you know, he's caught doing something that he shouldn't have done, et cetera, et cetera. So I meet with him quietly in the morning and he leans up and he said, I just, I just asked myself, you know what? I would never forgive myself if something happened to me. And I never told you like, what is it? He slides me an Amway brochure. I drag my butt down to church here at this terrible hour in the morning for you to sell me Amway. You know, the Dutch founded capitalism pretty much stock market comes from Amsterdam. The Dutch are a small nation that, you know, certainly punched above that and continue to punch above their weight when it comes to business, even if it's sketchy like Amway. Um, and growing up in the Christian Reformed Church, you'd always bump into people who would get on the Amway bandwagon and they'd do it for a while. And then if they were, and well, to finish the story about this guy, and I'm like, he says, the only reason I joined the Christian Reformed Church is I went to a Rich DeVos Amway rally and he talked about how integral his Christian faith was to his business and the importance of the Christian Reformed Church. Uh, over the last couple of years before Rich DeVos died, he wanted to see the Christian Reformed Church and the Reformed Church of America merge, rejoin. And so he was pumping a significant amount of money through his foundation into joint projects between them. And I in fact was, so part of how I've kept Living Stones going over the years was I kind of rent myself out to other organizations. And so I pretty, so I, I work for the organization and they pay the church. And then the church continues to employ me. So yeah, is that sort of Amway like? But the, um, so I had the King, the K-E-Z Kingdom enterprise zones and we had reformed leadership initiatives. So I worked for a bunch of those things and that was all from Amway money. So yeah, yeah. Have you ever had a multi-level marketing scam burn through your church? I just told you the story. Uh, what did you do about it? Um, like, like a lot of things they burn out quick because people get all excited and then if they've got a conscience, they realize, wait a minute, the only way to really make a lot of money on this is to kind of be like a mobster. And so, oh gosh, you're poor Rick, Rick, the pounds are, you know, you caught Rick just at the right time because he started his diet again. He wants to lose weight. So now you're adding, you're adding exercise to his diet plan. They're just melting off Rick. He's going to have a six pack before you know it. He's out of breath. PVK Euro tour fund. Yeah, I definitely want to do that Euro tour. Thanks, Joe. All right. Um, Echo Air Doc, Pastor Paul. I had an idea that I crafted in the spirit of the IDW about evolution and archetypes in the ancient world, cultural centers at mid latitudes, fostered an environment of large social hierarchies. People, people were used. People were used to a Pope or an emperor at the tippy top and carved out room for them in their subcritical brain centers. Could then a barbarian as understood in the ancient world simply be he who lacked the ability to function in a large scale social hierarchy, deeming it better to see how he fared alone or with only a few in a high latitude environment, scarcity, which was bet, which was better for small groups. I just read yesterday an article in the New York times about people sort of taking a shot at Jared Diamond and, um, Yuval Harari about the necessities of hierarchies for large civilizations. It was written by the same guy who wrote the book that I really enjoyed debt, um, basically about the first 5,000 year history of debt. It's good questions because the, the conventional wisdom now is that you need hierarchies in order to scale out civilization and to have it function. But of course, the, um, the Jonesing we are doing for equality says, no, no, no, no, we're, we're finding even older civilizations that were wonderfully egalitarian and equitable. Well, first of all, you get really old civilizations where you don't have any writing from them and you're just sort of looking at the archeology, making suppositions. Yeah. There's a lot of room for fudge and something like that. So a little bit skeptical and I'm mostly skeptical because of the motivation that it's in some ways a secular alternative to the garden of Eden. See the world was a place of peace and love, just like John Lennon imagined until hierarchy came in and then people hurt each other. So in order to stop hurting each other, let's just all be equal. Okay. I'll believe you when you join Julian's Hutterite community. There's my answer. So yeah. Um, and could I superimpose this idea upon church history to explain how human behavior differences could explain schisms and fractal Protestant groups thrived at high latitudes while large ecclesiastical structure of the Roman Catholic Church thrived at the lower latitudes. This is the aerosol guy by the way. Ooh, echo air doc. We got some, uh, fallen earth creationism coming through here. So he asked, he's, he's, I can't wait to, I can't wait to share that video with you guys because, um, it's a really fun idea and, and, and we could play with it. So there's all these questions right now about what does it take to actually level up? I think part of the, part of what's interesting about today is that a lot of the scarcities that created, or at least we're a part of some of these hierarchies have sort of been demolished by the industrial revolution, which means that especially, I mean, if you've lived in the third world and then you live in the United States, it's like, you really sense the difference between a place of abundant stuff versus scarce stuff. So again, if you look at Peterson and Rob Henderson's conversation, this idea of, of luxury beliefs, um, I think is, is really apt because if we can't differ, if we're all, if we're all walking around with iPhones and I am not, I am still team Android. If we're all walking around with smartphones, how do you, how do you differentiate yourself? Well, you know, Kim Kardashian can do it by having her, her COVID birthday party on a private Island and then going on YouTube and are going on Twitter and doing this weird privilege apology thing, um, which, which also at the same time sort of inverts and becomes a sort of status thing. You have to have a certain amount of status to feel embarrassed about your status while never giving it up by the way. So, I mean, this is how weird this stuff goes and why we get these, these inversions and these purity spirals. So interesting stuff, Paul, the parable of the hidden treasure in the field. Oh good. Oh good. Hey, Hey, I've cruised through these rec. You should be proud. What time is it? Oh, it's 1112. No, I guess we got a late start too. So no wonder I, no wonder it feels so fresh. See, Grizz is really teaching me a lot of things because, you know, he has these wonderful segues too. Um, and by the way, I have a Patriot. If you see it in the, she'll see it in the, the conversation that I posted this morning. I almost, I almost edited it. Actually, this is, this was one of the times that I was tempted to edit a conversation because of that, that darn chicken that Chad put on the table. And I thought, Oh, this is gonna, this is gonna, this is gonna get uncomfortable for some people. Anyway, you got to watch the video to know about the darn chicken. Paul, the parables of the kingdom, the parables of the treasure hidden in the field and the pearl of great price, Matthew 13, 44 to 46 represents similar, but distinct truths about the kingdom of God as local churches are to some degree, the gatekeepers of the kingdom of God. Should we present Christianity as something with a low barrier to entry with a huge potential payoff, like the treasure in the field? Whoops. Or as enormous value, but as a high barrier of entry. See, this is a really good question. And this is part of the reason Jesus doesn't get stale. And you know, one of the best ideas I came across was Peugeot's where he says something to the degree of Jesus fills up the hierarchy because it's both. And that's really hard for us. And, and the further, the deeper, the higher resolution it goes for me. And the deeper I get into this, the more often I see it's both. So, so, you know, we'll do this question and answer for awhile. And then Rick and I will do whatever we need to do after it. And then this afternoon I'll do my rough draft for Sunday. I'll work on my sermon and I'll make a recording of it. I can't tell you how many times after I finished my rough draft for Sunday, it's like, Oh, that sermon is terrible. I really have to work on it a lot between now and Sunday. Sometimes I do. And sometimes I don't, but the rough draft is important. Part of my sermon process. Anyway, I like how you phrased it here. Well, let me, let me go through your question with a little bit more care and do a little bit more commentary on it. I think I agree that it represents similar, but distinct truths about the kingdom of God as local churches are to some degree, the gatekeepers of the kingdom of God. Yeah. That word gatekeeper, their portals, their shock troops, their, I guess you can't really eliminate gatekeeper given the keys. Should we present Christianity as something with a low barrier entry and with a huge potential payoff, like the treasure hidden in the field and as something with enormous value, but a high barrier of entry? Part of the difficulty that we have is that when you have a low barrier of entry, people don't imagine there's a high payoff. People don't imagine there's a high payoff. And that's actually part of the decline of the mainline because in Peterson and that Clay Rutledge conversation that Jordan and Clay did that got posted this week, that was a really good conversation. There's a ton of good stuff in that conversation. So Clay, Paul and Leitner did a, did a really nice conversation with Clay a while ago. He said some other interesting conversations on YouTube, but that conversation with Peterson, they, they went into a lot of really interesting areas and one of them has to do with some of these issues. The treasure hidden in the field is interesting because I'm not sure the treasure hidden in the field is a low barrier of entry because again, he sold all he had in order to buy the field, in order to sort of rook the field out from under the guy who owned it first, because of course, if you went to the guy who owned it first and said, ah, by the way, there's a massive treasure hidden in your field. He doesn't do that. He, he, he goes and says, yeah, that, that there's like no water there and there's a bunch of scrub and you know, it's, you know, maybe, maybe, you know, a quarter talent is all it's worth. I'll give you a third of a talent just because I'm a great guy. How's that sound? Thanks. And then of course you, you uncover five talents buried in the field, but it, but it's not really a low barrier to entry, but, but, but the point you're making here is correct because Jesus pitches it both ways. Jesus at time, at times pitches it like, well, prostitutes and sinners will come into the feast of the patriarchy before you righteous. And then he'll say, unless your righteousness surpasses that of the scribes and Pharisees, you cannot enter the kingdom of heaven. Jesus pitches it both ways. So now if you were a skeptic, you could say, ah, he's an, he's incoherent, but life is like that. You know, what is the barrier of entry to be, to inherit the British? The wealth of the British monarchy. Well, it's an enormously exclusive club on one hand, on other hand, what did, what did Prince Charles have to do to inherit it? Uh, be born first. Where's his responsibility in that? Zero. What do you have to do to stay in the family? Not get too close to Jeffrey Epstein, apparently. Yeah. Life is like that. And yeah, I, I, so there's three, there's three conversations, the two Randall's conversations I had Wednesday, which were stellar. And then the, uh, my conversation with Greg, um, and Rick has, which was also, I think quite amazing, but it's going to be uncomfortable. Um, what, what was really good about that conversation with Greg is it really pushed me and I know you're going to, you're going to watch that conversation and it's kind of going along and Greg and I are talking and he's sharing some of his stuff and I'm sharing some of my stuff and we get to a point and it's like, I'm, you know, some of what Greg did just kind of forced me to immediately up my game. And he forced me into an understanding of why Jesus miracles, why Jesus, why, why I can't in a sense. So that conversation sort of goes like the new atheist basically say your God is made up. And Greg basically says, watch me, watch me make up my God. I'm going to use reason to make a God with all of the, with taking all of the psychological and rational elements of it. And I'm going to construct it. It's, it's sort of like, um, I forget who the father of modern sociology started his own church. Um, it'll, it'll, it'll bubble up. And so, you know, when I watched Jordan Peterson and, and Clay Rutledge talk, neither of whom are believers. How on earth to categorize Peterson, neither of whom are under, neither of whom are under the discipline of the church. I'll say it that way. Talking about giving all of these rational justification to the church. The rational justifications for the value of religion and the value of crunchy religion and its benefits for humanity and the poverty of the secular attempts at replacing it. Okay. And then I see Jesus and then I see Jesus walking by the sea, not the lake, the sea of Galilee. And I see a man with broken chains living among the tombs and the people of the town avoid him because he's scary. He's Halloween 24 seven. He's terrifying and he's extremely dangerous. And Jesus walks up to him and says, we're going to clean house. No, don't throw us into the abyss. Send us to the pigs. All right. Go to the pigs. And then there's the man seated, clothed in his right mind. And he says, Jesus, I want to join your, your little posse. I want to join your tribe. And Jesus says, no, go back to your hometown. Tell them what God has done for you. Lance. See Rick run. Because if you follow me and you joined my tribe and we go back on the other side of Lake to Capernaum, nobody knows who you are. And they might hear stories about how you were this crazy man, but they won't understand, but if you go back to your town and they see you clothed in your right mind and you say, Jesus looked into my heart and he drove out a thousand demons and he did it with a word and he can still a storm and he can raise the And he can still a storm and he can raise the dead and he can say to a, to a wealthy man, a rich young ruler who says, I followed the law and he says, go and sell everything that you have and come follow me. Oh, I didn't want to, I didn't think it would come to that. And a man who can still a storm and raise the dead will allow himself to be arrested by temple guards, turned over to Roman soldiers, beaten. And while he's on the cross, the most incisive mockery ever. He saved others. He can't save himself. No, he is saving others by not saving himself. And unlike a Marvel movie where, you know, iron man would, you know, reach out his hand and call his little super suit in from his Trump tower and New York city and would all come on him and he would come off the cross and yada, yada, yada, yada, yada. No, no, no, no, no. He expires. They stick a spear in his side and water and blood flow. And even though he told all his disciples three days and I'll rise from the dead. None of that hapless crew show up at the tomb. And the women who are going to do the dirty work of, because they were observant Jews, they weren't going to do that on Sunday on the Sabbath, on the Sabbath, saboteurism. And then Sunday morning, they go there and the storms is rolled away. And where's his body? And he is not here. He is risen. And Peter comes and sees the empty tomb and John comes. And then he comes and shows them a fish and they still can't eat the fish and they still can't get their mind around it. I can't make up a story better than that one. I can't make up a God better than that one. I can't even make up a good story. I'm not a good fiction writer. So there's my God. There's my path. There's my path. And it's on one hand, very low barrier of entry. On the other hand, an absolute barrier of entry, one that I cannot achieve. Perfection before the law can't do it. And that's, that's the reality. So, yeah. And, and it's poured into those parables. All right, Paul, why do some saints in many icons, you can ask me about icons. I'm a freaking Protestant. I don't know anything about icons. Jonathan Peugeot's too far high up the art too high up the art too far up the hierarchy to ask, to have him answer your icon questions. Sorry about that. Uh, I'll, I'll, I'll do my best. Paul, why do some saints and many icons like the last judgment, but also stand alone, have their hands folded across their chest? I have no idea. Zero idea. Ask Peugeot. And if you can't get to Peugeot, put it out on the internet and some Peugeot wannabe, you'll take a crack at it, but I have no clue. Um, okay. Peugeot talks a lot about, what am I the, what am I the Peugeot you can't get to? Okay. Peugeot talks a lot about technology and death. I get there are tech nays that use death, but Peugeot seems to equate all technology as connected to death. Yeah. Garments of skin. There was a science fiction book I read years and years ago. I read some science fiction in high school and really enjoyed it. Where basically the idea was in order to travel through space, ships basically had to have within their construction. Layers of life that would absorb the death to allow the people inside the ship to actually traverse space with something like that again, I'm, I'm rem, I'm trying to remember a book that I read 40 some years ago. So, and one of your randos out there will probably say, Oh, that's so and so that's, that's the brilliance of the internet. Um, and I think that's the, that's the, that's the, that's the um, that gets into this fall on earth creationism that the conversation, this whole, this, this whole, this whole question answer this week is, well, just one big promo for all the randos conversations coming out this week. Um, that gets into this whole fall on earth creationism because there's what I really liked about the, um, the aerosol doctor is he's, he's looking, he's looking at one of the real hard problems of our traversing the discarded image, which is what do you mean? What, what is, how do we connect up the fall in history? We see the fall validated. If we look in a mirror, if we look at our neighbor that we see, but what about the good garden and, and a lot of what we're doing in modernity is tinkering around the edges of this. And so his fall on earth creation of his sort of a big whack, here's a fresh idea. What if this happened? It's like, Whoa, that's an idea. I, I'm, I'm less skeptical. I can very much understand Peugeot's connecting technology with death, but the man and the woman are placed in the garden and they are gardeners gardening. Boy, this is hard. Is gardening death wielding? Think about pruning the certain branches die so that the tree can be fruitful. Is that pre lapsarian or merely post lapsarian? This is why theology is both fun and hard. This is why theology is both fun and hard. So Peugeot is onto something there, but I'm not ready to jump on the bandwagon with him, I need to consider it more. What was the nature of the gardening done by the man and the woman before their rebellion? How were they gardeners? You know, they're naming animals. What are they doing with those fruit trees? You know, in a way is fruit ripening death. See, and this gets into when on the day that you eat it, you'll surely die. What does that mean? I remember as a kid growing up, you'd read the story and it would be like, wait a minute, he ate it and he didn't die the same day he ate it. What do you mean? What do you mean by day? What do you mean by die? Will he start to die and only end dying when, you know, they put them in the ground? Um, again, the, the fall and the fall on earth creationism video is coming out soon and, uh, I think, I think, I think folks will have fun with that. So this is a good question. Sorry to, sorry to give you, sorry to give you a grief there, Connor Murphy. Um, it's a good question. It's a hard question and I'll have to think more about it. And maybe, you know, maybe Peugeot and I, we, we, Jonathan and I haven't talked for a while, maybe we'll talk again soon and maybe, maybe Peugeot and I should do a mutual question and answer together. That could be fun because people can put questions that are going to make us. Steel cage icons. Yes or no. Boom, boom, boom. PVK pay for view managed by Rick. He's writing something down now. All right. Um, I, I call culture Cregan. All those K's make me think of the krill. What are your thoughts on Brian holds worth Catholic Chad YouTuber? I think I know who you're talking about. He's sort of a young guy looking, you know, all youthful and hip and, and he's got kind of a trad channel. And I think I've watched a couple of his videos. I haven't watched enough of them to really form much of an opinion though. So sorry for the weenie answer, but it's all I got. All right. Joe Schmo, seven 88, as opposed to Joe Schmo, seven 77. So I would like your reaction to this short quote from a Jewish philosopher, France, Rosings, we, who influenced Kaufman. Ooh boy. And it's here discussing God number one versus God number two, but thanks to the new Testament Trinity is too easily reduced to reintroducing the meta divine realm. Oh, that's interesting. See if I can click on it, make it bigger for my old eyes gold. Okay. But the heathen unity maintains its monotheistic point, so to speak, only through this Jewish uniting of the distant God with the near, the whole with the one zone, but in this fusion, do we have the essence of Judaism? And it is this fusion as articulated in the doctrine of the Trinity, however broken, however, in danger of lapsing into the divided condition that lies before an outside Judaism. That is the essence of Christianity as well. The gravity and the eminence of this danger are revealed for us now in the works of Bart and go garden. I don't know who go garden is now this union is the kernel of biblical revelation. It is what makes this book, the Jewish book, so important to us. It makes this book, the Jewish Bible, the difference between the Jewish Bible and the Old Testament lies in this view viewed from the standpoint of the New Testament, the God of the Old Testament as compared to the father of Jesus is too easily reduced in a way to the God of Aristotle. Hmm. What a heck of a thing to put in front of my eyes and hope for me to answer it. Wow. I can honestly say I would probably need more context and in order to, to really follow his train of thought. So I get, so once, so I've been talking about God number one and God number two ever since I watched the first Jordan Peterson Sam Harris conversation and God number one and God number two have been developing ever since then. And again, part of the downfall of my attempt at distributed cognition is you're getting all the rough drafts instead of finished products like you normally would something like a book or an essay or, or even a blog post. So you have the uncomfortable experience of watching the sausage being made with all of the, you know, cut off pieces of finger that got into the grinder. And then you realize what all you're eating. So one of the questions I continue to get is, well, you've got God number one and God number two, well, what about the Holy spirit? And it's like, no, no, no. God, the father is not God number one. And Jesus is not God number two, which kind of leaves us with a Benetarian um, posture because God number one is in fact, fully agent and fully arena, both. And Jesus, and then I got asked the question in this little trial live stream I did is how can Jesus be seen as a renek? Well, in Christ, Paul does it. Paul makes Jesus a renek with understanding the kingdom of God as being in Christ. And in fact, Jesus does it by just talking about the kingdom of God or the kingdom of heaven. I mean, kingdom is an a renek word. So, and the Holy spirit, if you go to, and I mentioned in the live stream, if you go to, you know, they had the Toronto blessing for a while, a number of years ago, where it's, it's raining gold and teeth are becoming gold and, you know, they're the Holy spirit, come Holy spirit. The Holy spirit is between us. I talked about that with John Vervecky. So the Holy spirit is a renek, but the Holy spirit is also a gentek. And so the whole, you know, where my talk with John Vervecky came down is sort of the, the fusion of agent and arena. And in some ways there's a mapping between that and where we started this talking about miracles. So when Jesus says, peace be still to the storm on the sea, that just, you know, you have this, you know, this, this, this, this, this, this, this, this, this, this, just, just this, this flux going through the agent arena relationship. Jesus becomes the, the arena of the sea for a moment and the storm becomes an agent and Jesus tells that dog to stop barking and go sit in its corner and the dog obeys. And again, if you look at CS Lewis's book miracles, CS Lewis talks about miracles of the old and new creation. And part of what I get from Lewis in that book is the idea. I actually had it, I don't know when, I don't know what, I don't, when you read a book so many times, you don't know when ideas arrive or where they come from necessarily, but part of what happens in, in the rebellion, which is a word I prefer to use to the fall is that we and our sister become estranged, our sister nature, and that's why I know it's sort of, John Vervecki is a pretty, he's a pretty open, pretty durable guy. So when I, when I suggested to him in that one talk with he and JP Marceau, that water walking is perhaps something in our future. Well, how can that be? Because our sister now sort of holds us up when we go for a swim. But what if we were on better terms with our sister? Would she let us walk? She let Jesus walk. Jesus invited Peter to walk. Peter could walk on the sea as long as he kept his eyes on Jesus. Jesus was lending his agency to Peter to walk on the sea. Now that's deeply symbolic. And I think in modern terms, historical as well. And I think in the new creation, we will be reconciled with our sister. We will be transformed as will our sister. Now, you know, our friend, Jacob loves trolling my rough drafts for Sunday. Now that I'm focusing on the apostle Paul with his uncomfortable questions for us. And I have abs, I hold absolutely no ill will for Jacob for. You know, pushing back on my Christian faith and, and Christianity's dependence on Paul of Tarsus. I hold absolutely no ill will for Jacob for that because he is, he's being a loyal member of, of his group and his religion. I'm not going to, I'm not going to think less of him for that, but at the same time, I'm in the same boat, I'm in there with team Jesus, and it seems very clear that what Jesus does in the gospel record is basically say to all of the other people around him who were all tremendous readers and interpreters of the same text. Jesus basically says to them, I am the, I am the interpretive key of this text. And my, the sign of this, you know, he does all these miracles and then they ask for a sign, he says, I'm not going to give them a sign except the sign of Jonah. Well, what's the sign of Jonah in the belly of the well three days and then rise. And so the resurrection is, is the sign and Jesus demonstrates that he's the interpretive key via the miracles. And that's a point that the Pentecostals have now again, miracles aren't exclusive to, you know, a little church in Kansas city or a Toronto airport church or, or your neighborhood, AFG or churches in Africa. And, you know, this is a big deal, but that's how the miracles function because the miracles demonstrate the Lordship of Jesus over the world. And I gotta be really careful here. You know, part of why, oh, ABC, sorry, Paul, Peugeot's Q and A's are at the end of the month. Part of why I have absolutely no ill will towards Jacob in, you know, pushing back on my sermons about Paul and I've absolutely no ill will against Sam pushing back on my Trinitarianism is because, well, actually they're probably making me stronger. And they're forcing me to look at uncomfortable things, which will probably dive me, drive me, I think deeper into the truth. And it's not like I can't learn anything from Jacob. I do. And it's not like I can't learn anything from Sam. I do. And so someone might say, well, why does God leave all these heretics around? Well, they must be for my benefit. So let, let them be the gift of God to me that he has made them to be. Now, of course, they'll say you're still all wet. That's fine. We'll still be friends. So I can't fully understand this, but I, you know, I'm not going to be able to but I do sense the tensions in it. And, you know, even, you know, a formulation like this, I mean, I wouldn't have found it so convincing if he didn't argue so well about some points, pointing out some things that. Anybody should be able, I mean, a good argument points out things that are available to all of us. Where, where is the birth of the God of Israel in the Bible? Why isn't it there? Why, why are all the other gods born? Wow. The God of Israel is not like Zeus. Now they're, they're going to get, you know, in Christianity that that's a powerful point that they're making because in some ways this, I don't think we can, we're fully going to get away from these tensions with us. And so in many ways, you know, what happens as Christianity grows in Rome is that all this tension between God, number one and God, number two, it just keeps fluctuating. And, you know, when we look back in history, we look over centuries, but we've just been looking at the tiny little fluctuations of God, number one and God, number two, you know, within a number of decades, you know, Chuck Colson, I've used the story often. Chuck Colson comes back and says his wife, honey, I'm a born again Christian. I've, I've become a Christian. And she's like, I thought we were Episcopalian. Um, yeah, thanks for the quote. Um, I'm curious. You've made me curious. You didn't make me curious. I'm always curious, but I'll, I'll have to, um, look at, look into this a little bit more joint question with, um, Jeremiah, you're constantly having conversations with people you fundamentally disagree with on really important things. Do you have any wisdom or advice for maintaining your integrity and conviction when people across from you is demeaning and ridiculing what you hold to be true and good? I don't talk much about. Home and family stuff here, but I'll say this. If, if you can learn to navigate, um, difficult, a difficult marriage or a time in a marriage when things were very difficult, if you can learn to navigate church fights, if you can learn to navigate the kinds of disagreements that are common to us all. And, you know, if you're, if you're, if you're having a fight with your wife or your husband, and you're having a lot of fights with your wife or your husband, and you're not giving up on your marriage, you can grow because for as wrong as you might feel your wife is or your kid or the person in your church, you can grow. The person in your church or the person down your street or your political rival. If you can stay in the relationship, you will learn self-control because I'll tell you, if you've got someone who is as close and intimate with you as a spouse, I learned this fairly early on in church because people in church would try to play games with me that, you know, try to bully me relationally or emotionally. And it's like, you know, I've, I've, I've, my wife is a very determined person and she's very smart and she's, she's just as stubborn as I am. I mean, the two of us, we are two of the most stubborn people you can imagine in many ways and, you know, I, you know, once, once you go to the depths with someone else and then have somebody come across and they throw an insult at you, it's like, it's like a toddler, dad, you're being mean. Okay. You're too, you know, so if you can, this is the power of making and keeping commitments and, and movies have it all the time. I remember the Christopher Nolan Batman movies, you know, that the first movies usually sort of the origin story. And of course, Batman, his, his parents are killed and, you know, and then he goes over into Europe and he's living in this pit and they learned to fight. I mean, the dune does exactly the same thing with the, um, the Freeman on, um, uh, Arrakis and it's the same thing. Once you've, once you've been through the underworld, having a conversation with someone who says you're a heretic or you're a bigot or you're a racist or you're a horrible person or you're, oh, okay. I've, I've, I've been through wars that this is, you could throw words at me all day long and now the thing is, if you go through the fire, it can make you hard and bitter and reactive, but that is very weak, or it can make you strong and confident because your ideas will be tested and you'll be satisfied with them and you will understand their compromises and you will live in them. Because the truth is when you're talking, the problem that we face as people is that we, we forget what's me and what's you. And once you learn that to a varying degree, when I first saw, why did I first get interested in Jordan Peterson? I, like many of you saw the suspender video and a couple of those videos from those times where you had mobs of young people attacking him and he kept his cool. Now he obviously doesn't always keep his cool and he's lost his school many times, sometimes doing well, sometimes he shouldn't have. We're all like that. But he kept his cool. And when I saw that, I thought, here's somebody that is comfortable in himself and knows his own mind to a degree that in the midst of a really disorienting conflict, he's holding his own. He knows who he is. He knows where he is and where he stops. Well, how do you learn that? Well, you learn that by making and keeping commitments, by having differences with people and still being committed to loving them. So that's, so I just said, you know, Jacob, I don't want Jacob to go away. Uh, when Jacob writes, when Jacob tells me what he really thinks about my sermon, about the apostle Paul, I value that. I mean, he could ignore me or say nice things because he doesn't want to hurt my feelings. That would be okay too, but I appreciate the candor. So, but this stuff comes usually when you've had to go far deeper levels of pain and then if that pain can produce in you, self-knowledge and, and for me, you know, the, the travails of, you know, maintaining a marriage of two very different people over 30 plus years meant that in hard times, I also had to look to, to God for my strength because it's one thing to be right. It's another thing to be wrong and to know you're wrong and have to repent and have to confess. And that's when you go to God and say, I have no righteousness of my own. Would you give me your righteousness? My thoughts are bankrupt. Would you give me your thoughts? That's, and if you can learn to do that, then you can sit across someone and not get triggered. Part of the problem with people today is they, and the world is training people to do this and to be it. And it's so stupid. People are putting all their buttons on their chest and daring people to push them. Well, you know what they do? They push them. Of course they're going to push them. They push them. Of course they're going to push them. So that's one of the areas. The other area is to, you know, cover yourself with armor and be impervious. No, the strong person knows themself and they're usually tested by fire. And, but all of this comes by living with commitment. Sometimes it comes by being stuck in a corner and you can't get out. And so, you know, when I look at Peter and Paul saying things like, you know, slaves obey your masters as to the Lord, people today look at that and say, oh, that's horrible. They should rebel. You know, that Roman slave had zero opportunity to rebel. And so what that slave had to learn was I am first of all, Jesus slave. And I will obey this unrighteous master because I will obey Jesus. What that will mean will be that there will be points that that slave will probably do something wrong. And that slave will probably do something wrong. What that will mean will be that there will be points that that slave will probably not obey that master because the slave is finally answerable to a higher master. And it will also mean that when that slave does not obey his unrighteous master, the slave will do that out of love. And the master will see that and think on one hand, oh, this is, this is breaking away from the tools of the devil. He is coming at me with a, with a, with a weapon that I cannot withstand because it is the weapon of God, because the weapon of God is love. Now God can of course employ all the weapons because he made, he makes it all. But the weapon of God is love. And when the slave employs that against his master, this is exactly what Jesus teaches. Now it might cost the slave his life, but again, in Christianity, our life here is but the beginning of much more. So if you can understand giving up certain hours of your week going to the gym, you can understand giving up your life here for future strength. So don't waste, as John Piper said, don't waste your sufferings or don't waste your sorrows. As CS Lewis said, Jesus came, not that we might not suffer, but that in our sufferings, he said something like this, we would be like him. That's how you can change. I got to end the questions. All right. Palamabran, Hey Paul, you inspired me to order the Heidelberg Catechism, which came in the mail the other day. Any study advice to get the most out of it? There are lots of resources for the Heidelberg Catechism. It's an old document. There's a commentary written by its author that you can look at. I would say though, the classical way in the Christian Reformed Church that we used to study it was memorization. And you can start with the first question and answer. What is your only comfort in life and in death? That I'm not my own, but belong body and soul and life and in death to my faithful Savior Jesus Christ was fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood. What's more, he watches over me. That not a hair can fall from my already bald head without the will of my Father in heaven. So I would say that's a good way to get into it. It's a beautiful document as a Protestant and a Christian foreign minister. I'll say it's not scripture. It's a beautiful document and there's wisdom in it. And so I hope you enjoy it. Also, here's the question. I hope you enjoy it. Also, here's the question. Why is your church's Christmas decorations still from the previous year? Rick is laughing. I've waited so long to ask this that we were almost to the season again. See, if you just leave it up, it's always there. Oh, you know, Jonathan Peugeot, when I first met him, asked me to talk about my liturgy. And I said it, Jonathan, it's a mess. I can't answer questions like this because it might hurt some people's feelings if they'd ever hear about it. But this church is like, this church is a very strange little place. If you don't believe me, ask Rick. He will tell you this church is a very strange little place. And it is so funny when people come here and they ask me, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you. And they, especially if they come to, if they just come and see the building, they're like, oh yeah, there's, there's the homeless people. Here's the dumping. Here's the, you know, but when you come here for a service, then it's really, I mean, I always say this, people are like, I want authenticity. I said, you come to my church, I'll show you authenticity. You know, you, you don't really want authenticity. You want, you know, Levi Strauss selling your jeans pre-ripped. That ain't authenticity, baby. I'll show you authenticity. We got that in spades. So we are what we are. We are what we are. But, but even, you know, there's, there's layers to this because in Christian reform churches, many Christian from churches wouldn't have Christmas decorations up. So it's, it's this church is this church was planted in the 1960s, early 1960s. Late 50s, early 60s as an outpost for CRC people who were moving to the city. It's early mission. It's early pastors had a very, had very much had a mission heart and found a lot of reception from African-Americans. And so embraced that. And that was about the time that this neighborhood was being developed. And it was one of the neighborhoods that was developed right after redlining. So African-Americans who working for the state could now afford a suburban tracked home. But this neighborhood is astoundingly diverse. And so not just African-Americans, but Sacramento has a large Chinese population, a large Japanese population. And this church had all that diversity. Earl Marlink then came, he passed away just last year or so. And he very, that was during the racial reconciliation period. He really wanted to see if you could have a church that was multi-ethnic. And in fact, it grew. And, and, you know, eventually they called me and I ticked off a bunch of Dutch people who left the church about six months after I got here. And more people from the neighborhood came, Rick shrugs. Yeah. And, you know, it's, it's, it's a real, this church is a real boy or a real girl, because she's a bride. So she's a real girl and she's got all of the reality of a real girl. And right now she's an old lady and we'll see if, we'll see if God has a resurrection in store for her or, or what God will do with her. But she's, she's beautiful in Christ's eyes and she's beautiful in my eyes, but she's a little weird and a little eccentric. And if you visit on a Sunday morning, you'll see it. I tell people, you know, if you go to grandma's house and I remember as a kid, you'd go to grandma's house and grandpa and grandma were losing their eyesight and, you know, they didn't have a dishwasher or anything like that. They wash the dishes by hands and you pick up a fork and there's still like food stuck on it. And mom's like, shh, shh, shh, don't say anything. Grandma would be mortified if she knew she put a dirty fork on the table for her grandchild, but she can't see it and she doesn't know she did it. So just eat with the dirty fork. And there's a, that, that does not make success in a consumer church culture. I'll trust me, but we're kind of the church of the dirty fork in some ways. So we're making some improvement. Rick's helping us. So we'll, we are what we are. God bless us. All right. Where are we at? Taking the Lord's name in vain, considering the New Testament marital illustrations. Is it possible? The command is warning to not take it, to take calling oneself a follower of the one true God lightly. Yeah. Yeah. There's, there's, there is that to it. You know, there, there's like with a lot of stuff with Jesus, there are a lot of layers of paradox and complexity with this. And actually, so again, I've talked before about, you know, I probably used to enjoy a better reputation amongst my colleagues in the Christian Reformed Church until I got messed up with this Jordan Peterson character. And then all you randos and, you know, libertarians and conservatives and Catholics and Orthodox and atheists. I mean, talk about one sure way to ruin your reputation. And then, you know, the Christian Reformed Church is doing a director search. And one of my colleagues says, are you going to apply? And it's like, I got a thousand hours of unfiltered opinion giving on YouTube. I don't think any denomination wants that as its top spot. Trust me. And so in all of that, when I was, you know, working through the Sermon on the Mount, not too long ago, Jesus has a lot of really interesting things to say about reputation. Because here's the funny thing about Jesus. No Christians, doctrinally assert he's the son of God. Jordan Peterson says he is the son of God. Peterson says he is the ideal human being. So Jordan Peterson says, you know, could Christ be the ideal human being? Well, if he's so ideal, why does he have such a bad reputation? Why is he in fact so unpopular that you can get Jewish nationalists who want independence from Rome and the Roman oppressors to agree to kill him? He got to be pretty unpopular for that. Everybody hates you. Okay. Except his little tribe of followers who both love him and are confused by him. So how do we think about that? Did you sneak a little question in there? Oh, maybe I didn't read it. How do we think about that? And I think in the sermon on the mount, Jesus basically says something about, he says, again, he keeps saying these two things. On one hand, let your light shine. Don't hide your light under a bushel. On the other hand, he says, don't practice your righteousness to be seen before men, to be praised by people who observe them. And implicit in that is go ahead and have a bad reputation because Jesus had one. Reputation is a really powerful thing. And I thought a lot about that, especially given the loss of reputation that I've suffered in talking on YouTube and, you know, associating myself with the likes of Jordan Peterson, and especially his, his fans, like many of you. At some point you can't let your reputation be your master. It has to be your servant and it also has to be true. So I think it's good sometimes to do things to torpedo your reputation. Intentionally, no politician would ever want to do that. Well, see, then there's Trump and Trump sort of did that. So it's, it's, it's really something. How a wife takes the name of the husband and then rolls onto Sabbath as almost a honeymoon like day dedicated to whom we profess to belong. Yeah, there isn't a sense, there's a sense in which I can really understand how. And Jordan Peterson sort of does this. It might be good to not identify as a Christian publicly. I understand that there's, there's a wisdom to that, but there's also a demand. And Jesus says it outright to identify with the son of man publicly. It's like Jesus, which, which is it? And he, I think he just kind of smile at us and say, be wise as serpent and serpents and innocence as, as doves. So the other day I thought I should get a clear understanding of what it is. And I know Jacob back there clapping. When are you going to wear a clerical collar? Rick just hung his head. You better get, he's getting faint because he's on a diet. We keep talking about tacos. Cause I thought, you know, if I, if I decided to dress the part, if I decided to, and actually I thought I should dress the part, I should dress the part. And actually I thought I should dress the part fully. I was visiting, we had some people who are associated with this church that were in prison and I was, I visited the, the pen up in Susanville and the chaplain there was a character. He wore a cowboy hat. He wore a duster. A duster is these, this Western long leather clothing, long coats, like you see in the matrix or a cowboy hat or a duster. And he was a character. He was the chaplain at Susanville. I remember walking across the yard with this guy and it's just fascinating. Cause he, he got us in and part of me would love to wear a big hat, a clerical collar and a duster and just wear that every day. This is people be like, Oh, we actually had a Deacon here that pretty much dressed like that for a while. Um, that kind of dramatic show, boy, that'd be fun to play with. But I, I worry about taking the Lord's name in vain. And so in that sense, dressing like a drab Protestant post 1978 clergy, like I do, there's also that. So, yeah, I think about these things. Hi, Paul. Can you have a healthy relationship with a challenging homeless person? I hope so. I've been trying for years. What if they are old, sick, have drug addiction? I don't know any others than the old, sick and have drug addiction. No, I do know some others who have, I know some who are young, healthy and have drug addiction and mental health issues. I should read the question. Settle down, settle that ADHD down. What if they are old, sick, have drug addictions and on top of that are extremely paranoid to the point that they accuse their helpers and hosts of physically and mentally abusing them. You are not called to have a relationship with anyone and everyone because you are not God. And there are likely people that you for some reason cannot have a relationship. With, and so don't and don't feel bad about walking in the street and talking to people and talking to people. You're not called to have a relationship with anyone and everyone. And don't feel bad about walking away because you are not God. You have limits. Know those limits, hold your boundaries. You will probably be able to, there's, there's, I always tell people there are two lines in this world. The one line of wanting to be loved and the other line of being willing to love. One line goes on forever in this world of wanting to be loved. The other line of being available and willing to love. Never a line there. It's always everybody in the other line. So find, if, if, if you're going to have a relationship with a homeless person, find one that's appropriate to you, your circumstance, your giftedness, your locale, your age, your, your sex, you know, the, the issue of, um, of cross sex ministry is a real thing. I, I am very careful around women because I'm a man. I'm very careful, or especially around young women. I'm a lot less careful around old women. There used to be a woman in this church. She was in her upper eighties. She'd come next to me. She'd grab my butt. She'd squeeze me. She'd when she looked me in the eye and said, pastor, why don't me and you run away together? She meant it. Now, what else we got here? If your colleagues don't like you because your association with Peterson, tell them to do their job better. Rick, please draw emojis. Oh, thank you. Thank you. Some colleagues. Some colleagues, not all, not all. Probably the ones that don't know me as well as some of those who do. Um, where was I? Oh yeah. Little Ruth. I talked to her daughter. So she was in her late eighties and her daughter was in her sixties and her daughter said, yeah, you think it's bad with you. You should, her doctor is a really good looking young Asian man. That gets absolutely. Yeah. I can imagine the doctor's office. Coming onto the doctor, shamelessly. When you're an 80 plus year old woman, you know, who's been a widow for years. It's like, she, she just working her hand as best she can. Maybe one of these days, some hot young things going to say, yes, that's that. That was her game, but didn't have a hold on me. I'm going to leave my wife for you. No, I don't think so. Um, so we have to pick and choose. And, you know, all the stuff I said about reputation is real on both sides. What a, one of, I really love, there's a book called lion country and it's part of the book of Beb, uh, Charles Beekner. And it's a book about, uh, the, the sort of ties, the entire question and answer to the together. Because here's a guy for whom it was rumored that he raised someone from the dead. I'd be like, Oh, he must be a real Christian. It's also rumored that he's a pedophile. And if you go and find the guy, he's in some backwater church in the state of Florida, not far enough south in Florida to be really cool, but further north in Florida, the uncool places and he's running an diploma mill. So if you write the guy and send him 50 bucks, he'll make you a minister and his church of whatnot, the book of Beb. And it's about this character named Beb and he is all of these things. And the first book is the best book is almost the case when there are sequels. The book is lion country because this, this reporter comes down from New York City in order to expose this man and to get a really good story that would heighten his social capital by exposing Beb to be the fraud that he is. And of course he goes down there and that has a hot daughter. And, you know, and then, you know, he wants to go in there and just sort of shellac bed, but now he's on one hand, the daughter's a little, the daughter's a little scary too, as you might imagine Beb's daughter would be Beb's wife is another character. And he wants to go down there and just shellac Beb, but he then begins to realize that, well, yeah, there's the diploma mill. There's the rumors of pedophilia. There's this, it's gotta be this fraudulent rumor about him raising someone from the dead. And there's this weird church and the, and the strange people that are in it. And, and, and, and no wonder my church is so weird. And I love the book of Beb, but he can't, he just can't so easily dismiss Beb. And of course what Frederick Beekner is doing is making a point about Jesus and his followers and his church because that's us. Yeah, you have your crazy uncle going to your Yahoo Pentecostal church. You know, I've got a, I went to the Rod Rear Conference last week and I bumped into a young man who used to go to this church. You know, people sometimes go to this church and they find a better church to go to. That happens and God bless them. I don't blame them, but he, I married him and his wife. And he has two sons now. And, but his, his father lives in an area outside of town and his father inherited some money. And he has a big barn and his property and this, you know, horse, horse lot area of Sacramento out here. And he has, you know, he has these itinerant evangelists that come in and they do healing services and, you know, this big Trump country and I got Trump signs all over and they made it. It's all the kind of Christian that would make, you know, Jesus and John Wayne authors cringe. And I love it. Not that I can't critique this and that and this and that about all kinds of things. And sometimes he drives his sons crazy with his Christiany antics. But there's also something about him you can't so easily dismiss. Job, if Jared is having kids, fun. Jared needs to, Jared needs to marry the girl. Jared has a wonderful girlfriend and he needs to marry the girl before kids. Please, please. So that, that sort of pulls it all together. Why would Jesus still a storm and allow Romans to beat him? Why would Jesus church have, you know, crazy miracles? I mean, I love, I mean, Tom Holland digs up all this pre, pre-reformation stuff in the Roman Catholic Church, you know, the Cuthbert's body gets carried around and Cuthbert eventually, Saint Cuthbert is sort of de facto, you know, ruling kingdoms in what will become, you know, the United Kingdom. Christianity, it's just wild, but the world is wild. And so if your, if your religion is way too buttoned down and tucked in, it can't be real because real things are wild. And, and the real world is too big for us to, to really master. And, and the only way, like a powerful horse, the only way to actually master it is to, is to, is to have the world and us reconciled. That's what Romans eight is about. So, well, I can't hear anything from the discord server, which is, which is too bad because, um, oh, they're all going to be, they're all going to be, they're all going to be because, um, oh, they're all gone, I guess. They're all out there in YouTube land. Um, but God bless you for gathering today. And it was fun. And I hope if I didn't offend any of you at all, I probably failed, but I hope I didn't offend anyone too badly. Um, and I thank you for your time and attention because truly these, this kind of thing is humbling for me because I, I don't know enough and I'm not smart enough and I make mistakes and I get things wrong and hopefully y'all can fix it in the comment section. Um, but, um, I do, I do believe, I do believe that, as I said, in the Grizz video or the recent, um, third lobe quartet video that, uh, that the resurrection is true and God is good and he is available and he can change your life in really surprising, unexpected ways. Sometimes it'll be hard. Sometimes they'll be sorrowful, but they can be good. And I also do believe that this is only the first chapter of an incredible story because if you look at the human story, if this is what God can do, even with our rebellion, imagine what it'll do with us when we stop rebelling so much. So that's my, that's my appeal to you. And I know some of you, that's just this naked appeal of Christianity, but, um, you can't stand this channel if, if that makes you, if that drives you away. So anyway, we ready to end transmission, Rick. It's a good time to land a plane. All right.