https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=PiJRCtDEYH0

 Hi, this is Paul. If you watch my videos, you might notice that I'm always a little fuzzy about exactly when and how I discovered Jordan Peterson. My best guess is that I first read about him on Rod Rear's blog, but that might not be the case. At that point, before I was doing YouTube, I had a pretty well established rhythm of RSS feed readers, feedly, things like that, and I was always just sort of looking for information that would feed me in many ways. I'm not going to make that mistake again with this guy, Hans Georg Mueller, even more. I don't know how to say his last name. We'll get to that at some point, I'm sure. But I wanted to record how I found him. It was Aaron on Twitter basically saying, giving a link with myself, Jonathan Peugeot, David of Revable Wisdom, John Verveke, that I should check out this guy. And he had had a conversation with Benjamin Boyce. So he's very much had the attention of this little corner of the internet. Now, so then I started taking a look at his videos and I very quickly realized, oh, there's going to be a lot here for me to look at, which is a little difficult because of my ADHD. I seldom really finish anything I start. So here we go again. Now, I was just yesterday, I saw this tweet about this podcast, which I didn't know about, of a joint podcast between Ricky Gervais and Sam Harris. But it isn't really about atheism, as people have been telling me. And so it just made me nostalgia. And of all the good celebrity atheists gone, remember the old days when, when the wake of 9-11, Sam Harris was expressing his anti-Islamic anxieties and fears as anti-religious. And because there are so many silly Christians at hand, building a brand and a career about sort of debunking and doing all that was quite easy. And well, that's that, you know, became Sam Harris and Ricky Gervais, similar in some ways, but and Ricky Gervais is a, you know, he's a comic genius in many ways. And as someone said on Twitter, he's least funny when he talks about this kind of thing. And I did watch the first season of his little, his little sitcom, where he's a widower. And, you know, I really enjoyed a lot of it and actually thought about making some videos back when I was watching it and haven't watched the second season yet. But now we've sort of got to make do with what we've got for celebrity atheists. And so, you know, snacking on Matt Dela Huntie is sort of like eating generic Oreos. That's kind of the way it is. But rationality rules keeps putting out Jordan Peterson videos. And so YouTube keeps, you know, serving them up to me and I keep watching them and they get under my skin and I want to talk about them. And then it's like, well, should I do a video about this stuff again? But I, every time I sort of run that in my mind, I think, yeah, I should. Because the arguments he puts out there, even though they're 20 years old and maybe Sam Harris did them better. Of course, Sam Harris and rationality rules are on different sides of the Protestant Reformation of the Church of Atheism. And Sam Harris is a Catholic and rationality rules is a, you know, is a, is a, is an Anabaptist, let's say. So, I mean, because that's all about the culture of woke. And so basically what's happened is that the, you know, the, the civil war in the House of the House of rationality is all over woke or not woke. And what this means is that Sam Harris is, Sam Harris is now on with Shermer and many others on their IDW anti-woke crusade. You know, this brings me all the way back to my conversation with Dr. Jim, the cardiologist from Idaho. I've had a number of conversations with, I haven't had any contact with Dr. Jim for a while. He might have moved on from my channel. It's sort of the way it goes with YouTube think channels. But he said to me, he said, you know, the rise of new atheism and the rise of Jordan Peterson is all about the death of modernity. And I don't know if he said it quite that way, but that's, that's what I took away from it. I got to do a little grim gris here and adjust my camera. And he's, he was exactly right. And when he said that to me, light started going on. And so what we see now is sort of the turn of a level celebrity atheists. I remember, you know, I, you can't even get some of these guys to talk about Christianity anymore because the anti-woke atheists are, you know, so Arden in their anti-woke campaigns, they find conservative Christians as their natural ally. Whereas before conservative Christians were the enemy. Not so with their rationality rules. We continue to be the enemy for, for rationality rules. And he's continues to make videos like this. So call it decadent or call it, you know, call it what you will. But if he keeps making them, I'll keep watching them and I'll keep, I'll keep, you know, getting annoyed by them and then wanting to do a response video. But there's a lot of competition in my salience hierarchy for, for stuff I'm going to make videos of. And I haven't really pulled one off yet for rationality rules. But again, I think those issues that he raises are important. And, and he's sort of riffing on the Stephen Fry Jordan Peterson conversation. That was a number of months ago that I'd done a conversation that I'd done a commentary on a couple of months ago. So we'll see if he keeps putting them out. But, but again, those issues are very big in terms of Christian deconstruction. And so there are issues that I as a pastor do want to do some videos on. Christianity is deeply embedded in the enlightenment and the wokesters are now seeing, um, are now seen by the A level celebrities, like celebrity atheists, like Sam Harris as a bigger threat to the enlightenment than Christian fundamentalists. And I think, and that's what dawned on me a couple of days ago, that this is really an issue about the enlightenment in some ways in the same way that Protestants were anti-Catholic because we just needed to keep the fight of the Protestant reformation going and the Catholics were the enemy and the Pope was the anti-Christ. And so we've just got to keep beating that drum. And so what is really the drum of the, of new atheism, it really isn't Christianity, it's the enlightenment. And so, you know, this is, this is part of how this is turning and, and with the, with the death of modernity and the dying of modernity and the dying of this form of rationality and rationalism, you know, they're, they're going to keep going on about this, but, um, it's all heaven and earth stitching. So I've, I've got another video coming out. I don't know about that. I'm going to have to post that video sequence. It's sort of a follow-up to my commentary on the Keith, what was his last name? Um, on the video about wokeism and transgenderism. So, and it's all about this register that, you know, I'm more and more thinking about this. It's simply a, it's sort of a cognitive reduction of rationality, empiricism, heaven and earth, mind and matter, spirit and flesh. It's all of these dualities, this, this two mapping that is, that, that we're simply not going to get away from by virtue of the structure of thought and morality itself is impacted. The idea of morality itself can't help but be in the upper register, eternal static. And it's in that video, the first video that rationality rules did basically on moral relativism that, that really sort of had me churning on this. And it came just at the time when I was thinking about these, these two registers in terms of the, the continual mapping of the two worlds mythology into our present day. And again, I think the critique of the Keith Woods wokeism and trans humanism video. And again, I think the best articulation of this is actually in the Bible and humanity is this, and a metaphor for, well, is from the story of Genesis. Humanity is the stuff of earth and the breath of God. Now that isn't said exactly like that in the Bible, but that is the story of Adam's creation, where God made a man from out of clay and he breathed into him and the man became a living nephesh. That is humanity. And I don't think there is any better articulation of humanity than what you find in the book of Genesis. Well, if I didn't believe that, why would I be a Christian? So that's the easiest way to say it too. I think it's the best sort of picture mapping of what a human being is. But technology is putting these slow moving issues on steroids and what's happening as increasingly we are not encountering human beings like we encounter them out on the street or in our families or face to face. We are encountering them in representation. We are so images, graven images. We encounter them in words, biography. We encounter them now on screens and on voices. And remember this technology is, I mean, this technology is today. This is brand new because if I were to ask you, let's say, a detailed, ask you for a detailed description of the difference between 1500 and 1600, well, there's just way too commentatorial explosiveness. There's just way too much information there for you to manage. But the introduction of the printing press in the West, the Colombian exchange, the discovery of the Americas, the beginning of globalism, the Protestant Reformation, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, all of this comes in in the 16th century. And things have just been accelerating since and things are continuing to accelerate. And so what Paul VanderKlay is, you know, when I was doing my ContraPoints video on Envy, you know, and I knew when I kept calling her she, a bunch of people would say, no, he, no, he, and so you want to have this fight over pronouns. I totally understand that in this little community that sort of gathered around Jordan Peterson, but whoever or whatever Natalie Wynn was before she became Natalie Wynn, it's sort of like me talking about Tony Soprano. Andrew Clavin just dropped a really nice video on the Sopranos. It's sort of me talking about Tony Soprano instead of James Gandolfini, because on television in the Sopranos, James Gandolfini was Tony Soprano. I could talk about Geraldine and Flip Wilson. Geraldine, if you remember now, I'm dating myself, but there's a reason I'm going back to the 70s, because we're kind of revisiting the 70s in a lot of different ways these days. Geraldine was a character played by Flip Wilson, and if I talk about Geraldine, I would use a feminine pronoun. And you might say, oh, Paul's going woke. Good luck. Not according to the people who hate me. I've had one in the comment section recently. It's been interesting. I always think it's a sign of health when I have someone in the comment section that hates me enough to show up in every video and leave comments that express outrage at what I'm doing. I mean, if nobody is expressing outrage against my video, the video probably isn't worth watching. So that's just sort of the way it is. But all of this is about heaven and earth stitching. It's all about the breath of God and the stuff of earth and how these two things come together. Now, so the rationality rules video, the great myth, he very quickly starts about, starts talking about Kant. And every time he does this, it's like, gosh, my, my grasp on psychology is insufficient. And a good number of you know this. I'm not a, I'm not a, on psychology. Yeah, that's insufficient to miss speaking all the time on philosophy. I mean, I had a number of undergraduate courses in philosophy. I've read books. I enjoy it, but I'm, I don't have a degree in philosophy. I'm certainly not a philosopher and I get stuff wrong about philosophy all the time. And I can name names of a lot of the people who have sent me things that you're just wrong about this and philosophy. And I take that partly because I'm not a theologian, but I do know a few things about theology because I have more training in theology and I have more training in biblical studies. When Jordan Peterson talks about meekness in the way he does it, he's just wrong. He might be correct psychologically in some ways, but he's wrong in terms of the, in torrents terms of the linguistic tradition of what's happening in the Beatitudes. There's just a rightness and a wrongness about things, just like Jordan Peterson could have endless examples of, of things that I would get wrong in terms of psychology, because I've had even less training in psychology than I've had in philosophy. But, you know, here I am on YouTube and there you are listening to me. So I'm always having to relearn philosophy. And so I, you know, there's, I'm always trying to learn too much at once. I'm like a kid who can't get everything in his mouth at once, but has this insatiable appetite, probably going to get diabetes someday. But so history of anything is never static. And what that means is if you're looking back and this is because I actually have a degree in history, and that's the way history works. And it kind of gets into this question of personhood, because the Immanuel Kant of today is not the Immanuel Kant of a hundred years ago, is not the historical Immanuel Kant. Well, who is the historical Immanuel Kant? We can't look back at Immanuel Kant. And now you're going to say, well, Paul sounds terribly postmodern. Well, the postmodernists have a point. The problem is with almost every movement through history, someone overreaches with their point, which the most postmodernists have been doing. But how can we talk about the real Immanuel Kant? And so, you know, after thinking about, I want to make a video on the rationality rules, great myth, I really want to make a video, but there's been so many other interesting things happening and I haven't really sort of, it hasn't really gelled yet. And I'm always thinking about sequence of the videos that I dropped because there's certain things I want you to see for those of you who watch all my videos before I introduce some ideas, because I want to introduce ideas in one video and then that I'm going to start playing with in subsequent videos. So I have to kind of sequence the videos this way, but then something like, like the Mark Galley piece drops and it's like, oh, stop everything. This is huge. But part of it is because I've, I've got all these irons in the fire. You know, I've got the, I've got a video that I'm going to release about a conversation I did about homelessness. I've got a conversation with burn powers that I'm going to release on my channel. I've got a really cool conversation with a guy from Greece about orthodoxy and my take on things. And that was cool. So I've got just way too much in the pipeline that any one person should post on any YouTube channel. I totally understand about the fact that in some ways I'm killing my channel with product, but my life is not my channel anyway. So I'm going to put, I'm going to put as much through stuff through this channel as YouTube lets me. And at this point they haven't said no. So here we go. So rationality rules with his little video. The great myth starts with Kant and I think, okay, I got to brush up on Kant before I say anything stupidly wrong again, which I will do. And then along comes and I'm not, don't know quite know how to say his name correctly yet. Hans Georg Mueller Mueller. Well, I would think probably it's a form of Mueller, but you know, it seems a pretty German name. And I'm watching his videos like, Oh, Oh, yeah, this is doing a lot of scratching where I'm itching, baby. But then I also noticed as I start watching multiple of his videos that he sort of daisy chains them, which kind of puts me in a problem because it's like, am I going to do a commentary on every video he's released? Because he's released a few. So, and part of this is dealing with, and my, with all due respect to all of my academic friends, you know, you got stereotypes about pastors out there and there's always an degree of truth to them. You academics, there's some commonality between all of you too. Now, Jordan Peterson is really an outlier. I mean, in many ways, but there's, you can't look at an academic and just, you know, the thing that they study is their baby. That's just how they are. But academics are not always great natural communicators, but this guy's pretty good. He's, and some of the strengths of the academy in terms of his presentation, his patience, his pacing, they're all quite good. And as anybody who's been to college or university knows, just cause you get a PhD and you love a certain body of information doesn't mean you should stand in front of a classroom and talk. And often the, the sins of professorship and lecturing are compounded by YouTube. So, but, you know, John Verveckis a skillful communicator. There's no question about it. And I'm sure, you know, he's a favorite professor at U of T and part of it's just because he's, he's such a lovely, genuine, you know, loving person. And that shines through Jordan Peterson is of course, he's a phenomenon. He really is. This guy's good though. This guy's good. He's he, and he's using YouTube fairly well, which is also unusual for academics. So good on him. And so we're going to talk about his video and we're going to go, we're going to do a commentary on one of the whole videos on Kant's ethics. And I learned a ton from this video. It was really good, but it very much, I want to bring it sort of into my mental stream of consciousness and the flow of this channel, probably because this is really going to be helpful in addressing a bunch of the celebrity atheist moves that rationality rules is continuing to make in his Viagra fueled, you know what about Christianity. So here we go. So I'm level looks good. Here we go. Thank you very much for your continued support of this channel. And today we're talking again about Kent, about Kent's ethics, because Kent's philosophy really consists of those two parts. The one, the end. Now again, as I said, he sort of daisy chains his video. So you kind of have to start at the beginning and go from there, but I haven't, I haven't done that yet. I don't know if I ever will, but at some point, everybody's life is sort of like that and you can't, we can't rewind us all to the garden of Eden. So let's go analysis of pure reason where he basically just gives an account of reason investigating itself. And then second part of this philosophy is a critique of practical reason where he explains what can reason tell us practically how to lead our life. He tries to answer the question. What are we supposed to do? And again, he's already kind of leading us nicely into content. You can tell that he's, you know, he's got some, he's got some experience teaching people. And, you know, I'm also thinking about the fact that in some ways sort of this undergrad level is, has sort of become at least for my channel, a, you know, a nice place to at least begin conversations, just to cover some basic stuff. Like the critique of pure reason, the critique of practical reason equally addresses this so-called scandal of philosophy, namely the fact that philosophy didn't transform itself into a reliable form of science. Now he's got some, I've watched a few of his other videos already, and he's got some, some really good stuff on this. And so I'm learning a ton from him in terms of, you know, the, he has this other video that is the one I actually watched right after I watched this video where he talks about dogma and religion versus philosophy. And, and, and he sort of nicely lays out there that the, especially in the enlightenment, what the, so we can go back to Jordan Peterson talking about Jung's observation that science, we should probably say science and technology got going because Christian theology didn't give us all that we wanted. And so we turn alchemy into science and now we have a degree of ability to give us the lives we've always wanted by, you know, technology working on it, just, just at all these different levels and the frustration that philosophy hasn't turned out to be quite as handy and productive as physics and, and the children of physics, like chemistry and biology and engineering and, you know, inventions and all of these things, philosophy hasn't turned out this way. Now, now for me, this, this two kind of the, the two worlds mythology or the two different registers as I've been calling it. And again, part of the reason I, I do what I do in these videos is I'm developing the language as I'm talking because I find you can do it with writing too. And I find that back when I was blogging, before I was talking on YouTube, I would find the same dynamic when I'm writing, because I have this thought and I'm trying to say it, you know, we can think of Ian McGillchrist and the two hemispheres. So, so, so these two registers, well, well, philosophy is, is very much the stuff of the upper register of, of heaven, of mind, of spirit. And in some ways, and a lot of the other things, the physics, the biology, the chemistry, the engineering, they're things of the lower register. And, and by virtue of how every human being is, again, we are the breath of God and the stuff of earth. And, and we are the, the stitching and intertwining of those two things. And so, of course, we're going to find it easier to make advances quickly in the lower register. That's simply how the two registers are related. So, well, what's wrong with philosophy? Why can't we, why can't we whip this into shape the way we figured out the speed, you know, Newtonian mechanics, and then the, the, the, the, the kinds of engineering that we can build upon Newtonian mechanics with. So, so, can also hear very intentionally tries to develop a moral philosophy that basically serves as a moral science, as a moral metaphysics. This is where, now, this is where we get into, so Adam Friend did and Adam's obsession with objective morality, because, okay, and the two registers, the question of what should we do? Say, if you think about Jordan Peterson asking the question, if you need to get to the other side of a cornfield, how do you go through the cornfield? These are far bigger, more important, consequential questions than just the question, the, the sort of mechanical means by which we traverse the cornfield, because, well, is this field owned by farmer maggot? Little Tolkien reference for you there. Am I going to do damage to the crops that others have invented? I mean, because suddenly with this moral question, whole worlds come flooding in, and so part of what philosophy would love to do is come up with moral answers that are not dogmatic, and again, he has a wonderful video on definition of dogmatism, and I want to, see, part of the problem is I'm liking so many of this dude's videos, there might be a lot of these commentaries, so I don't know if that's a problem or not, but here we have it. Hopefully he won't, you know, go to that little page in YouTube and say, there's this crazy Dutch Calvinist pastor who is, you know, using my videos a ton, you know, tell, tell YouTube to shut VanderKlay up, you know, if you talk to, you talk to Benjamin Boyce, I'll, I'll maybe go through Benjamin Boyce and say, Paul's not a bad guy, don't, don't, you know, don't click on that button on YouTube, don't you want your ideas to spread? What he calls it, it serves as a moral science, develop a moral philosophy that basically serves as a moral science. And again, now this, see, I don't undermine your videos because nobody would get a sense of your video by listening to me, so I, because I totally hijack it. A moral science, well, what do you mean? Well, that once you use that word science and it's really technology, but once you use that word science, it's sort of enlivens in us the hunger for mastery. If we can, and this is always so deeply human and again, like Augustinian root show here, suddenly our ambitions are just enlivened and we think, oh, if I can turn it into a science, then I can have dominion. Then I can not only master myself, which most of us are too blind to realize we have not mastered ourselves. Then I can not only master myself, but I can master the world. It's sort of, there's going to be maybe a few Tolkien references. This is going to be Sauron's vision of mastery. As a moral metaphor, a philosophy that basically serves as a moral science, as a moral metaphysics. This is what he calls it. Interestingly, he says at the end of the critique of practical reason, this is a very famous quote, that two things fill his mind with admiration and awe, the starry heavens above and the moral law within. And what this quote clearly- Now it's interesting that the moral law within, notice that there's a geography to this moral law. But again, and he knows full well, this moral law isn't something that's discovered when you do archeology in Egypt or you do mining in Siberia. The moral law isn't that sort of thing. Where do we find it? We find it within. Now this is going to get into his ideas of rationality and of course, German idealism is going to come into play here. So there's a lot going on here, but the starry heavens above, well, there's geography for that. Starry heavens above, the moral law within. Again, these registers, these two world mappings, they aren't going anywhere. It really shows is that the supposed moral law within is very much comparable or is an analogy to the natural laws that govern the motion, motions of the stars in the sky. He said natural law. Carl, I do read your messages. Welcome back to the channel. Moral law. I know some of you just get moral law. Moral law. I'm sorry, I shouldn't troll. So govern the motion, motions of the stars in the sky. So again, this underscores this attempt to do ethics in the form of a moral science, just as a natural science where we- Now the production values of this channel are not bad. I don't know if, you know, again, my impression of most academics is that they're not too good with the techie stuff. But I don't know if he's doing this or he's got a student that's helping him, but good job. You have to identify certain basic laws, for instance, in physics. Also in Kant's moral metaphysics, his primary aim is to identify the highest moral law, the highest principle. And that for him is the categorical imperative. So the categorical imperative is an unconditional commandment. It's the highest law that is based on no other laws but grounds all the other laws. Okay. Now, this move that happens right here is really important. And this is part of what deism does to the Christian imaginary and the question of the movements around what I've called God number one and God number two. For those of you who haven't watched hundreds of videos of mine, and there are hundreds of them, those of you who are new to the channel who have thought, well, if I really want to understand Paul's channel, I should back up and watch the first video and go from there. Don't do it. Don't do it. It's probably not worth it. Anyway, if you didn't start the train, you'll never catch up. Ask anybody who's ridden this train. Anyway, God number one, God number two. Where did that little thing come from? It came from me watching Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson talk. And I very quickly began to realize that at the end of their first talk in Vancouver with Brett Weinstein, that Jordan Peterson and Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris's definition of the word God was very different. Sam Harris was very much riffing on the assumptions of who God was growing up in Southern California and watching American, probably evangelicals, talk about what God was. That's God number two. That's a relational God. It's an agentic God. It's a transcendent God. God number one is an immanent God, God as Irina, as in the meta-divine realm to look at Ezekiel Kaufman stuff. So again, I'm just, it's a whole lot of repetition and summing up here with God number one and God number two. So the Christian God is God number one and number two together. Now, again, there's no God number three because there's, unless you want to go into vervecchian transjective stuff, the agent, the agent-Irina relationship, God number one and God number two, the transcendent immanent God number one, God number two, general revelation, special revelation, God number one, God number two, a whole bunch of different dualities sort of map onto this God number one and God number two stuff. And I know a bunch of yous, well, you got to stop using number one and number two because that's bad. That's what Adam says. But the reason I use number one and number two is because it's intentionally blank and it's intentionally in some ways arbitrary. It's not exactly arbitrary, but it's intentionally so. So what happens in the history of deism is that in some ways, the meta-divine realm gets reconstituted in a Christian space. And natural law created order. We Dutch Calvinists say created order, not natural law. So when you hear me say created order and when your heart really wants me to say natural law, just do the translation. It's okay. Imagine me any way you like. I'm about to do a contra points video. Not really. This movement here to depersonalize to, and this is why I talk about the scientific lab leak because what happens is it's no longer God moving these spheres that Galileo is dropping from the observatory. It's not a scientific lab leak. It's not a scientific leak. It's gravity. So I have these laws of physics that sort of stand in in place of God number one. And we feel a little bit more comfortable talking about that. Maybe because, well, did God drown Lisbon? The evolution of the problem of evil has been interesting over time, and it has a lot to do with these issues. So this move that's getting made by Kant to, well, we want to have a moral law which is just like the law of the universe. So we want to have a moral law which is just like how we imagine the laws of physics to be. We want to take the personal stuff out of it. And once we have that, but this is quintessential modernity because part of the aspect of modernity is that the world is dead, except for us. We are the ghost in the machine. We are the ones moving the levers. Now, again, the meaning crisis happens when we take this assumption and we begin to look in the mirror and we imagine, oh, we're having an AI moment. What if I am a machine? We have an iRobot moment. What if I am the machine as well? What if there's no me in here? What if there's no self in here? What if I am just mechanistic? And this gets into sort of a functional social solipsism where I'm the only real agent and I have psychology and sociology to explain everyone else. And that's again, this sort of this divination of the individual that I am, and solipsism basically means I'm God and y'all are here for the ride, but the problem with me as God is that I'm an amnesiac and I just have to realize that I am God. Now, there are certain religious traditions that basically do something like this, that what I really need to get in touch with is my godness. The god in me sees the god in you. Oh, well, I frankly like my god with a memory and with a lot more agency than I have, but one of the things that you notice is that the god in me sees the god in you plus individualism leaves me alone as God and all of you are sort of substandard things. But anyway, so back to modernity, this view of the world and some of my first videos just came out of my mouth, this monarchical vision that I alone am God and I see the world as it is and all of that, well that flows from modernity. There are two famous formulations of this categorical imperative, both are related to one another. The first one is act in such a way that the principles informing your actions are universalizable. So the principles that inform your actions are supposed to be principles that everyone can apply at any time. Now, this is critical for the rationality rules stuff because basically the argument that he uses a la Stephen Fry and Jordan Peterson and the greatest myth, I think it's the title of the video, I don't remember, I don't have it in front of me, it doesn't really matter, is that well, Christians say that that's what they get from the Bible. Now, Jacob, you know what Jacob I mean because you're right now the only real Jacob in my life. When you talk about the Jewish law, I hear some of that. Now, there's a big question there about that I don't have any time to go into. But in some ways that rationality rules video is much more addressing someone with a law conceptualization that here we have these 613 laws and they may not be broken and they apply universally everywhere we go. Now, obviously to me, I don't want to say that that's what Judaism does because I'm afraid that that straw man's because I remember in seminary looking at drivers commentary on Deuteronomy, him going, it's an old commentary, it's like, I think, did I buy a copy of it? I think I might have at some point. There it is. So I first found this commentary at the library at what was then Calvin College, a critical and exegetical commentary on Deuteronomy by the Reverend S.R. Driver, D.D. Edinburgh, George Street, my eyes aren't what they used to be. Well, this one's 1978, but the original one had to have been like 1912 or something. Anyway, I remember first bumping into this and reading it when I was working on a sermon on Deuteronomy and he very nicely went through the differences between the laws and Exodus and Deuteronomy. They changed. It's a very old change. It's before we have any record of the changing. Now, here's the problem of my office. I just took this book down and I'm going to lay it down on my foot because I'm lazy. No, I'm going to put it back on the shelf. I have plans for my office and they might be coming to my video channel at some point soon. But what we're seeing here and what Kant wants to do is say, just like we've done with physics, like we have these constants, which again, What's-his-head noted that these constants change. Gravity is fluctuating. Speed of light is fluctuating. We wouldn't need a ministry of constants if the constants weren't constant. So what's going on in the universe? Anyway, we want moral laws to be like constants and this is exactly what Kant comes up with as this video really nicely articulates. Spoiler alert. The second kind of variation of this is act in such a way that you never treat people merely as a means to an end, but always at the same time as an end. Now, if you can't recognize Christianity in that, then you don't really know a lot about Christianity. And someone might say, well, that actually goes back to the beginning of Genesis, that were made in the image of God. And that then creates a framing. And again, your religion is the thing you won't deconstruct. Your frame is the thing you won't deconstruct. You need a frame in order to see the world. You need at least some constant in order to watch the variability. Otherwise, you can't track anything. The camera needs to be still to take a picture of a moving image. Otherwise, camera shake and running gazelle will not make a good picture because a photograph is a still. Maybe you say, well, if you have image stabilization and a super fast shutter speed, yada yada yada, you should get the point. And what I really liked about his presentation here, I should just play it because I plan on playing the whole thing and we're going to be here for hours. In this short video, I'm not really going to outline how a can't rise at the categorical imperative. Here, it may just suffice to say that the categorical imperative is supposed to be grounded in pure reason. That is, it is not to be affected by any considerations either of pragmatic utilitarian value nor by any considerations of what philosophers before him called moral sentiments. That is kind of an emotional understanding of what is right and wrong. Now, when he said this the first time I watched it, I thought about C.S. Lewis in the beginning of the problem of pain and basically Lewis's ideas of moral intuitions. And that maps onto a whole bunch of C.S. Lewis's ideas about that our moral intuitions, it's very platonic, basically see through to the moral order that's out there. And of course, at the beginning of mere Christianity, C.S. Lewis bases his argument for the existence of God on sort of a moral order argument. But, you know, Adam Smith is a very interesting guy and he, like many today, would want to sort of construct his moral universe from things found in experience. And so the major point that Mueller is making here, Moller, Moller, you know, if you go back you'll find all the trouble I had learning Jonathan Peugeot's name. So let's just call him Hans or the good professor or he didn't name the channel after him. So I don't know, H.G. we'll call him, we'll call him H.G. But the point here he's making is dead on right. So in other words, for Kant this has to be pure rationality. Rationality must rule, as it were. Instead, just like a natural law, the moral law is found through rational deliberation. Then, and this is very important, Kant says we follow the law, we ought to follow the law, merely because we understand that the law is right and we understand therefore because of the rightness of that law, it is our duty to practice it. Now there's so much there, what he just said, that well there's this moral structure of the world and it's our duty to follow it. Now a contemporary skeptic would say why. The law of the nation is that I only drive at such and such a speed or I don't encroach on my neighbor's property or I don't play music loud in my car and bother people who are trying to sleep or, you know, Lewis's observation that all of this law talk makes citizens out of matter. There's a lot weird going on here and there's way more built into the language and its culture and its assumptions as H.G. will point out as we get further and further in this video. This is a wonderful video, I really like this video. But this view of the world in many ways exemplifies exactly what modernity is about because personhood is excluded and personhood has to be excluded. This is the naturalism lab leak right here that well this seems to work well for spheres to sort of cut God and agency and personhood out of the equation as we're dropping them from our tower in Italy, Mr. Galileo. So why don't we just exclude God from everything and then well again in modernity this individual deistic solipsism then I will reign. At least after we find psychology because you're just a product of psychology and sociology and evolutionary psychology and you're just a product of those things but me I'm free. Well maybe I'm not. Meeting crisis. So this is what then Kant in German calls Pflicht, duty. So glad he said that because if I had read that word P-F-L-I-C-H-T exclamation point I would have definitely asked to buy a vowel. For him ethics is based on duty and duty in turn is based on under is based on his Prussian culture. There I said it. That really and he says it's heartless I think he should probably say it's personless. There's no people in this thing. There could not be. People have to be reduced to things like he's been describing. I mean in some ways the meaning crisis is the telos of modernity. It can't be any other way. And again what am I what's all this talk about meaning crisis. Look at the work of John Vervecky it's excellent. Morality has nothing to do with being kind or being nice. If you do what is right simply because you're kind or nice person then you're not really acting morally at all. Now he's saying this because his audience needs it for him to say it which shows the contrast between Kant and the world that regular people live in today. Just following or being nice. If you do what is right simply because you're kind or nice person then you're not really acting morally at all. You're just following some emotions and you just you know do what you naturally do because you're a nice person. Now here's part of the problem of rationality rules. This assumption about anthropology that he is speaking to right now which is seldom described or deconstructed which he's actually described using Kant to deconstruct this is pervasive and it's it's all over the place. I gotta put my watch on do not disturb. So that for Kent doesn't have any moral value. It might be a nice thing but it's not a moral thing. Morality for Kant solely consists in through purely that means non-empirical purely rational considerations understanding your duty and then acting out what your duty is. Again feels awfully Prussian. Anyway you can see why this guy's a good professor. He he knows his audience. He's speaking clearly. He's a lot more economic in his words than I am and he's he's laying it out in a really good way. We're only five minutes into this video. This metaphysical scientific rational approach towards morality is supposed to found something like moral metaphysics as moral science and it comes with a certain what we could call epistemological optimism right just like in science we can identify certain universally valid laws so the idea is we can also do the same thing for social life. And and now part of how we know that modernity is dying is because we don't just see this what he just very economically laid out and say ah we're now seeing ourselves watching this. Now we're going through all this Kant stuff because a lot of the really good stuff that he is playing with in terms of that what he's walking through now is just his undergraduate lecture of introduction to Kant. When he gets playing about profile and identity and profelicity whoo that's that word profelicity when I started hearing that word I had to pause and I had to think and I thought that is a crafty word that is a crafty word because the isity is sort of like felicity which is happiness. Profelicity I thought how does the pro no profiling this is this is about this is about this is about in some ways the the bliss of being nothing but a profile the bliss of becoming your profile this is getting into the secret sacred self and this is getting into becoming my avatars on the internet. We're going to get there we're not going to get there in this video but if you there will be links to this video of course down below if you're not reading the notes on my videos you're only getting half of the stuff not that I write anything special in my notes most of the time but all the links are in there so if you're a digger dig down and watch these videos and get into his channel because there's a lot of good stuff in here. So we can basically ground a future society on the investing eschatology and the ultimate discovery of these generally valid laws. We can bring the kingdom of god on earth there I said it. So philosophy is supposed to do exactly this job it's supposed to be not only the foundation as in the critique of pure reason for all the natural science basically but also for social science can very explicitly insist on the absolute necessity on the indispensable necessity of identifying these laws and of the validity of these laws. So these now when you say in you know well let's have him say it again. Identifying these laws and of the validity of these laws so these laws are valid with absolute necessity and they are indispensable. They're indispensable it's like wait we got a lot of ought smuggling here don't we Mr Prussian Immanuel Kant your your German Prussian boy I'm sounding like an American. It's my Jewish genetics welling up in me we're revisiting the 20th century right here in this little box. What's going on? Why is this indispensable? Well because we must we must what? We must arrive at bliss we must reach our potential we must god's kingdom must come without god because god can't be trusted. He's only telling you not to eat the fruit from that tree because he's withholding stuff from you. What you really want Mr and Mrs naked in the garden what you really want is to take matters into your own hands and make this world better than that guy who made the garden will only begrudgingly give to you if he has to maybe even then not so much. He says as much literally in preface to the groundwork of the metaphysics of morals attached to this absolute necessity or this indispensable necessity of the moral laws are like four notions that I'd like to briefly address. These four notions are all central to the age of enlightenment and thereby they're all connected to this idea of a metaphysical grounding of what is basically a scientific ethics as a form of philosophical moral science. Okay now shoot see this is so I listened to this whole video and I decided I'm gonna do a commentary on this video today and had a few more minutes and so YouTube served up another video of his which looked really good and it started talking about all this stuff and I started watching it and it's in my head now they're trying to replace religion because religion has failed. Well what do you mean it's failed? Well Luther said it's failed the Roman Catholic Church has failed and so Protestantism was supposed to fix what's in the Roman Catholic Church and what we got was like the 30 years war and you know wars within the Holy Roman Empire and the product you know Luther and Zwingli couldn't agree and the Anabaptists are doing crazy stuff until finally they learned non-violence and then we all sort of go and buy quilts and pies from them in Pennsylvania. We're trying to we're trying to replace religion here but our moral imagination has been infiltrated by Christianity at such deep levels we can't think of anything better. So these four notions of enlightenment are first of all autonomy and I love what he does here so these are four notions of enlightenment sort of like four pillars of enlightenment let's say autonomy well it means and again now think about modernity it's this deistic solipsism where I am the only true agent and all of you now this again comes quite a bit later this has to be after the development of the social sciences of economics of psychology of of sociology that all of you out there sorry to let you know my world and welcome to it. I'll cancel you if you get too annoying actually I won't really I love I love I CK who just is really outraged by me as a Christian minister and the kinds of positions I hold welcome to my channel you're welcome here I have no problem with you leaving the comments that you leave in fact they let me know that I'm doing a good job so keep at it but autonomy that auto know me oh he's gonna explain it he explains it better than I do so what does autonomy mean autonomy giving the greek roots of the words literally basically means self law giving auto being the greek word for self and nomos being the greek word for laws autonomy is a very strange notion which is early 17th century did you know that on the little because I know you know I I get those little I clip those little things from youtube too he's got someone editing his videos my videos would look this good if I edited I swear the second um uh enlightenment uh idea of freedom uh because the guy who makes the slides for church has this same picture that is used from the internet for some of the songs in church and I every time I see this I see the little chains that I made in grade school taking construction paper and gluing them together and making a chain there's another picture of autonomy or freedom like this that has like little little clips that are photoshopped onto someone so sorry I digress but if you don't like digression you better find another youtube channel idea of freedom uh because autonomy of course then does not mean that you can just do what you want uh to the contrary it indicates that you find out what the law is the nomos but you find it out yourself and in addition isn't this beneath all of our modern education well you need to figure this out for yourself you need to think for yourself so you'll see on one hand it isn't just pure liberationism that or libertarianism that I am totally free no I am free within a created order natural law I am free within this realm and I should find out what this realm is like so that I can maximize my autonomy and my agency and so right away freedom is sort of curtailed that you not only find out yourself what the law is but you also decide yourself to follow the law so in this way as uh Friedrich Engels later called it um we can understand Kant's notion of autonomy as a form of freedom consisting into the insight into that which is necessary freedom as insight into necessity free and and that's oh so now we're constructing the necessity in it so that then is part of the package and this necessity you will hear beneath all of the new atheists that and and that's exactly why in some ways my address to them is so post modern because they're like you must follow rationality why or or what there's no god who's going to come and punish me you just keep debunking hell right you and I are headed for the same big sleep right where's this necessity that you're placing upon me you just took old Christian necessity and dressed it up different you know you did the same thing as all of these preachers preaching hell you just said I arrive at this through reason now I can see what's going on outside my door my church looks so abandoned people are always shocked when I walk out the door it's it's like CS Lewis's argument about pantheism anyway continue freedom as insight into what is your duty with absolute necessity and then your capacity to follow through and on your own practice what is the moral law and and so you see actually whereas a lot of us would be thinking freedom as freedom from it's really more freedom too you this for kind and these are the notions number three and four that I'd like to point out connected with this our maturity and control so through this autonomy through our own insight into the law the moral law and our capacity to understand the law rationally we thereby also make let's say the informed decision to practice the law and this shows that we have achieved maturity so and okay so now you have a telos and and look at what the telos is I mean maturity is a is a telotic idea that this is the the fullness of agency the fullness of a a a developmental pathway and control this is this is again what we're what we have here are the foundation stones of modernity and and and liberalism in in the technical historical sense not the political sense so we can guide ourselves we are no longer dependent on the guidance of others and this guidance comes from what we could call intellectual or rational maturity so the mature being is the fully rational being that is then capable of exercising and here we get to the fourth and and of course this in terms of our social context is going to very much determine our status hierarchies well they're clearly not mature and in control and thinking rationally like I do watch Dallas Willard's Veritas forum video on world view transmission so much of this is is communicated and reinforced via via social hierarchies concept self control so we are fully in control of ourselves now I can't listen to this and also not think of the apostle Paul for the fruits of the spirit the fruit of the spirit not fruits singular fruit of the spirit love joy peace patience kindness goodness faithfulness gentleness self control from the book of Galatians there is there is in some ways in modernity so so and so so I've just sort of said wow look at look at the relationship between modernity and the rebellion in the garden and the rebellion in the garden Genesis 3 look at the relationship between modernity and the life the fullness of Christian life where a la CS Lewis screw tape letters Christ raises us up to be like him so so you've also also got sort of a a theosis happening here where we are made in the image of God and part of what's supposed to happen in our journey on earth is supposed we are supposed to grow into Christ and so there's a destination there in Christian theology now I should mention that a number of people all along the way have noted that HG here is a Taoist so those of you who are out there saying well you Christian pastor finding a Christian philosopher to gin up Immanuel Kant Kant is Prussian he's deeply embedded in Christianity Germany probably you know before the one of the most Christian nations in the world the epicenter of so much western civilization theological philosophical scientific you know pay attention to to Germany before the two world wars it's you know it took it took two wars basically to take down Germany and you know some in Europe are continuing to be well sure the EU is now just the new German empire and that's why the Brits are like no thank you let's leave and the French well I don't know what the French are thinking Germany finally has had its way with France perhaps I don't know I don't know anything about European politics y'all can fight about that yourself but you know it's it'd be nice in just sort of a dualistic way to say oh yeah modernity bad no also modernity good deeply Christian influence in the Enlightenment and so these these four Enlightenment values you can find them in some ways anticipated by the apostle Paul right and this is the end goal of enlightenment to be fully in control of ourselves rather than being controlled in some form of unconscious manner by some forces that lie in the world some forces that lie outside of our own rationality spiritual forces Paul would say that and and then Paul's transition with the law the mosaic code and I see in some ways we're we're still wrestling as Luther is and as Calvin does with well shoot I've been preaching about circumcision if they're not going to follow the bouquet the the the mosaic code are they going to act like Greeks and by Greeks they mean citizens of the Roman empire and the Eastern Empire in the first century and all of the kind of because Galatians Paul's going to have a list of bad things contrasting so the works of the flesh are all of these things the works of the spirit the fruit of the spirit is this love joy peace patience kindness goodness faithfulness gentleness self-control which again wouldn't come as any surprise to anyone who was sort of up on observations about what a virtuous life would look like perhaps under stoicism in some respects or you know the the we know that there were there were plenty of lists of virtues in the Roman world to illustrate the absolute necessity of the moral law which is of course a consequence of its absolute rationality I'd like to point to a famous and somewhat infamous essay Kant wrote towards the end of his life the essay is called on a supposed right to tell lies from benevolent motives in this essay Kant insists that what he already made very clear in the critique of practical reasons and in the metaphysics of morals that moral laws just like natural laws do not tolerate exceptions so here he gives the example of let's say white lies right and he says for no reason is lying acceptable and he gives an extreme example the example of someone coming with an axe to someone else's house and asking if a certain person is in that he wants to kill that this this this question oh sounds like coffee breaks over i'll be back a little bit i was gonna say this question bothered christian reform people who i gotta go deal with them there's a church down the street that offers covid testing and so people come in here all masked up and it's like is this is this where you have the covid testing it's like nope don't breathe on me you're looking for a covid test a person with his ex and even in a situation like this when you're opening the door and you see the person with the ex coming yeah so the the dutch crc version of this was all about would you lie to a nazi and the person asks you if the person he wants to kill is inside the house even then you're not supposed to lie even then lying is wrong you might do other things but you cannot lie so can't as be otherwise it wouldn't be a law the the violation of the universal moral law is more severe than the violation of certain specific individual interests right now what's interesting when i listen to this when i've got the rationality rules video in line is because in some ways he's talking as if christians do this and you can of course find some christians who sort of do this that gets into an entire debate after the protestant reformation about you know jesuits who seem to find the great flexibility to i mean jesuits were known for their rather their rather situational ethics in the post-reformation period citation the book reformations so and some some prod some fundamentalists could get really rigid but i've never met a christian that's as rigid as this and so it's sort of funny watching someone argue from rationality and have a position like this which is so enormously rigid and in fact it's so rigid it's difficult to live with and and you find at least in the biblical canon for those who know it well you know well why is it okay for david to eat the showbread when he's running away from saul this is a standard talking point in the bible about you know trying to be the way that the bible gets at questions of ethics through narrative is different and and it's not just relativism but it's not this kind of kantian legalism it's it's much more nuanced it's not a consideration of utility it's not a consideration of emotional inclination it's a moral law and because it's a moral law its violation is in acceptable interestingly enough as actually one viewer remarked on the previous video on kent kent at the same time was also very much racist by the way not only racist he was also a homophobic sexist and you can find out many other things where he totally violated what we would nowadays consider as general basics of moral decency just and okay so and i'm not i'm not criticizing hg here but what's amazing and this is where i get into the registers if you're going to have a moral system just having a moral system initiates the upper register of heaven spirit mind eternality timelessness constancy law what's interesting that when when kant look at the way this kind of both pictures it's got a little blend here in his video construction when when law when when kant talks about law as in let's say a law of physics that's really a different use of the word than the speed limit or legislation and that's what louis tries to get at when he says something of you know you know this kind of language makes citizens of this like kind of language makes citizens of atoms what what what are we what are we talking about with this word so you know it's it's interesting how and this again is almost part and parcel of well any any book like i imagine how you use it christians me speaking as an atheist would have timeless truths and now fair enough to the to the to the new world of the new world of fair enough to the to the to the new atheist and the celebrity atheist because christians talk this way all the time what they what they struggle to understand with understand is that a lot of that talk is is sort of born out of the political infighting within the church often between modernists and fundamentalists between change and no change and so that they sort of sound like aristotle when they say god who doesn't change but but aristotle's god who doesn't change is a little different from the god that we find in the book of jona who in at least some old translations repents of the evil he was about to do to ninova because the god the the especially the god number two that you find you know that god number two ish god of the bible hears prayer and relents and and that's exactly the the thing that the the dynamic that the um that sam harris will will simply scoff at because a god who hears prayer and responds this is this is exactly what we may not have in modernism name for moral judgments that he presented in the metaphysics of morals which like all his moral judgments are supposed to be grounded in um you in the universal moral law and therefore are supposed to be valid with absolute necessity so and and not only with absolute necessity but again if you go back to a slide before it has to be universal in other words this is always a law just like gravitational constant it's always a law it's always wrong to lie it's always wrong to steal and and there are no gray areas about david saying well salt sent us on this errand and we really need something to eat can we have the bread from the table of showbread please even though that's supposed to be only eaten by the priests and of course in the bible well then you know even though david is you know prophet priest and king you definitely have sort of these three offices even in the old testament which in some ways relates to executive legislative judicial but in the king they're sort of all in one but but they're always you know when the the bible is always working on well well should the king act like a priest and the prophets are should the king act like a prophet's well sol is with the prophets so there's all this ambiguity built into the scriptures that that the long conversation within the the people of the book are are wrestling with and trying to figure out what law comes out of this and and how these things impact the law but obviously in cots world law is this iron fixed thing and so even if you say well i'm a moral relativist you'd better not charge anyone else with being wrong you you lose that privileged position of accusation you lose that privileged position of accusation once you basically declare that it's all relative number one he said homosexuality is absolutely intolerable like having sex having homosexual sex is basically animalistic it's like having sex with animals and it is absolutely intolerable secondly all these examples again are from the metaphysics of morals if you have a servant and the servant runs away then you can by force make the servant return because as khan says the master's right to a servant is like his right to a thing that he owns and two more this is the guy who said don't use people as means like wow can't can't in moral pronouncements one he was very fond of the death penalty he thought the death penalty ought to be applied in any case of murder and he gave one example a thought experiment where he said look if there's an island and the island have a number of prisoners on death row and for whatever reason the people on the island decide to leave the island it is their moral duty their absolute necessity before they leave to first execute all the people on death row they can't even leave them back on the island and a fourth example a final he said there is one form of killing that shouldn't be considered murder and that is the killing of illegitimate children children who are born out of wedlock and he said killing such children is actually not really murder because and he uses this analogy these children have been smuggled into the or into society like contraband is smuggled into the economy that is by by illegal means they have entered society and therefore as he says their annihilation just like you destroy contraband cannot cannot be considered murder and and and you thought you thought you were saying caught was a bad guy because he was a racist or something he's killing babies these for example and particularly the final two examples the example with the prisoners who have to be executed and the illegitimate children whose killing is murder reveal what i think is a basic moral paradox and not only in kent's philosophy but in many variations of moral philosophy what we see in kent the the form the paradox takes on in kent is that he states that all his moral considerations are grounded in pure reason therefore are not historically or culturally relative however it is very clear that's why i gave just these four examples that in actuality they very much reflect kent's own cultural and social prejudices cultural and social prejudices of his time with regard for instance to so-called illegitimate children and also a certain psychology and a certain emotionality like homophobia has also the word phobia in it and Nietzsche very much engaged in such a psychological analysis of kent's moral philosophy where you can see and and this is the paradox that precisely such a moral philosophy which aims at eliminating social and historical and cultural contingencies and psychological and emotional components at the same time reveals itself to be highly informed precisely by such cultural and social contingencies by such a cultural and social background and by a certain psychology and a certain emotionality that comes along with it the now we've just watched Nietzsche explain kent via processes in other words Nietzsche's modern too i can't you know Nietzsche i certainly am not subject to these things i'm autonomous but kent he's just a product of his age paradox is that while philosophy moral philosophy tries to rationally cleanse morality in the very same act it shows the impossibility of such cleansing so interestingly enough i think kent's moral philosophy very much contradicts one of his basic aims in his critique of pure reason namely to eliminate dogmatism i think kent's moral philosophy is very much a form of moral dogmatism here he makes philosophy something like the handmaiden of a secularized christian mainstream morality he provides supposedly scientific metaphysical groundings for the prejudices of his time now this business about dogmatism is a big deal and i one of the candidates for video i wanted to do this week was words that fudge to bring that old series back dogmatism and i might because again he does a nice treatment of dogmatism in a subsequent video but so how does that map on sort of to my two register metaphor that i'm working here well dogmatism basically is you can't show your work because it's coming from the upper register and what we want is we want to be able to show your work down here all below in the lower register so then then we'll all agree but if it's coming from the upper register and so of course then new atheist celebrity atheist would say oh dogmatism because that's all that's all christian smuggling in stuff from the upper register and we don't we don't agree with anything in the upper register except that you can't live without invoking the upper register one way or another and kent is a prime example of it you are going to create something you're going to put something up in the heavenlies whether you understand it or not because that's what morality and all of these visions are that's the only place they can be located you put them in eternality otherwise if you if you remove the upper register at all then then you are basically everything down here is subject to decay subject to revision completely completely at the mercy of every context and well then we're just sort of in sophistry and and then you lose any ability to with integrity to stand up and say thou ought not thou shall not you should not your bad my way is better then you lose all value i think that is a danger at least a danger that philosophy also faces today both on the right and on the left with regard to wokeism that philosophy particularly academic moral philosophy unfortunately has a certain tendency to justify certain social cultural biases and is informed by certain emotional and psychological let's say tendencies while engaging in some form of philosophical discourse that rationalizes a certain prejudices of our times so while moral philosophy intends to eliminate social and psychological contingencies it typically still reflects precisely these contingencies in the moral norms that it proclaims this general paradox of moral philosophy can be further analyzed i think into three kinds of moral pathologies and again we we take khan's moral philosophy as an example of this now this part of the video i found very interesting because we're talking about them as moral pathologies but where does that word come from well i have one of my best friends in junior high and a little bit of high school until he went to a different school is now an md and he's a pathologist what is just walking around saying what's pathological no he gets you know you go into the doctor and they do a biopsy and they send it to my friend he's a pathologist he goes in and he says which cells are healthy and which cells are cancerous or unhealthy so what we're doing here is we're going to talk about pathologies but in order to pathologize something to turn it into an agentic frame in order to at least label some things as pathological you must have the idea that something is healthy and again what we've sort of done in a therapeutic culture is tried to get around making value statements by smuggling in other value statements in registers that sound biological like health and i've watched this in church work i've watched this in society in general no we have to do what's this is not about religion this is about what's healthy oh you've just smuggled in whole realms of values under the guise of biology and now what we're sort of trying to do when we smuggle in values via biology is we are we are working we're using this dead reckoning within the iron box of secularism to try to encounter values in the lower register without getting them from above that's awfully tough but i think in many ways that's the hope of a civilization that has basically lost its ability to listen to anything from above because that's all that we're left with and and there's you know that's in some ways a function of the great american experiment where we said okay we're going to you know there's all classicists who founded the united states we're going to found the united states on things like virtue no values no no religiously sourced values in there even though of course just like kant and how many others of his day you simply do not have a moral discernment clean room which is exactly what kant was trying to do in his attempt to gain this from and let's use the word pure reason so it's no time to you but it's an hour and a half to me and i have to get back on track here it's part of the reason i do these videos the way i do the first moral pathology is what i would call the philosophical pathology so the philosophical pathology consists in what we could maybe call an extreme moralist reductionism take the illegitimate child um case as an example right the production of a child out of wedlock is a very complex concrete act it involves human passions it involves emotions it involves sexual desires it involves it's a great example of the two registers and knitting them together because down in the lower register it's just it's the biological act of reproduction the upper register there's marriage well marriage you've introduced psychology the social level um the the the spiritual invasion of reproduction that might be a good way to say it both relationships it involves of course social and cultural norms and so forth so it's a very complex act but if then we reduce this act under the category illegitimate the child we re-describe this act as a moral phenomenon and and reduction is exactly the right word because again with with the two registers a lot of what people want to do is eliminate the top register and say well it's just the lower register and all of these intrusive ideas such as marriage and illegitimacy and commitment and all of those are should be off the table they never will be this moral judgment illegitimate child basically erases the whole complexity of the existence of this human being so it's it's it's an extreme simplification a moralistic reinterpretation of human life and a moralistic reinterpretation in terms of this supposed higher principle or this supposed higher moral law but this supposed moral law or supposed higher principle is not at all similar to the natural laws that it is supposed to be similar to and you can therefore see sort of the upper register at that point this is this is not really coming from below this is really coming from above this is much more emanation rather than emergence it is not the case that the principle that makes an illegitimate child illegitimate relates to the very existence of this child in other words you if you did let's say contaz's way and the child is killed you can't do an autopsy on the child and compare it let's say to a legitimate child who tragically dies you can't do an autopsy and find the illegitimacy or the legitimacy in either child within the lower register in the same way as a natural law let's say explaining the motion of the stars in the sky relates to this motion in the stars so it's it's a kind of an absurd reinterpretation of a fact that is in itself amoral in moral terms and i think that's again the philosophical pathology of moral philosophy that it subsumes certain acts to supposed moral laws which in fact have no specific relation to the case that they are supposed to explain and to judge and and so in many ways we're again knocking at the door of wilfred cellars and normativity as daniel bonovac points out and another you know another philosophical youtuber another professor of philosophy at university of of texas and in austin and to impose a certain value on the second pathology is what i would like to call the social pathology the difficulty that you have is that if you label these as pathologies you there's value all over it so a child dies a large a large male terminates the life of an infant let's let's try to as best as we can strip all the value statements out of the act so okay so baby killing no more no moral judgments there we have it we're not going to get away in the manifest image from value judgments of moral philosophy uh that's the dogmatism that i spoke about earlier the creation of a fundamentalist language the communication of supposedly no longer questionable now now the question of fundamentalism and the choice of that word is very interesting and and i don't think we have as if i don't have time this is youtube we have all the time in the world but i don't have time in my life at this moment but the use of this term fundamentalism is is a very interesting one and and we you know it's it's it's useful and i don't think it's illegitimate in terms of its use and we we know what it's communicating but one could do a fair one could do a decent autopsy on that word as well and because in fact what he's pointing out with these pathologies is that kant is you know this will lead to a certain fundamentalism and we don't want that fundamentalism because we want we have a sense we have an intuition already that there needs to be strength and flex in a good moral system we see that all the time there needs to be norms there needs to be give and take and and that's that's what we know we need in a good moral system and the source of our difficulty in constructing this and dealing with it in language as opposed to practice because you know language is of course a tremendously powerful compression algorithm but not as deep not as profound a compression algorithm as action action is even more profound of a compression algorithm because with action you have both the upper register and the lower register and language itself is located in the upper register self-evident moral claims and we have this of course not just in philosophy we have it much stronger perhaps even in religion now we have it very much also in in media in the social media we have it in politics we even have it in art so the social pathology of morality is the communication of fundamentalist dogmatic moral language that doesn't allow for further questioning and that's what the categorical imperative stands for right it is categorical right so the introduction of a certain in other words the categorical is of course upper register rather than lower categorical language in to society into specific forms of communication i think has highly pathological tendencies so this very manner of categorical speech points to the social pathology of morality and then the third and final pathology i'd like to address which is closely related to the first and second one is the psychological pathology it's it's a pathology of thinking of it's a kind of obsessive compulsory insistence on moral principles like again think back to the example of the death row prisoners right where we're supposed to feel this obsessive compulsion to you know first kill all these death row inmates before leaving an island so it's a kind of a moralist zeal a moral frenzy which again you see today in wokeism Kant's moral philosophy especially with respect to the example of the killing of illegitimate children and his insistence on death penalty deserves i think a label that Nietzsche coined for christian ethics he called it the metaphysics of the hangman in the twilight of the idols and i think kind is very much a secular version of this and very literally in the metaphysics of even okay so so much of this is examining the language that we because buzzwords are holy words what do i mean by that buzzwords are holy words buzzwords almost always tip us into the upper register and so it's a secular version well what does that mean well again a la tom holland understanding of secularity as the as the secret sister of the church so we're going to take god number two out and we're going to cover over god number one and call it deism and things like that and we are going to take personal agency out of it and but we're going to have all the same functional things happening in terms of a dogmatism and a moral framework that well then you have to simply ask is this moral framework an improvement over the old religious one and well we wanted an improved moral framework because well but suddenly we find ourselves with a a dogmatism that is far more strict than anything that you can find in the mosaic code because the mosaic code is is of course given along with a whole lot of narrative and in that narrative you'll have the kind of moral flexibility that we struggle to communicate law is really a very rigid thing narrative can often provide a much more supple flexible fleshy normativity than law can and and law is almost always mediated by a judge and it's the judge that brings into the application of the law a far more nuanced complex application than you can find in just static law itself morals he describes the metaphysics of the hangman interesting enough khan's been very influential for the philosophy of law philosophy of punishment based on retribution clearly khan's idea of justice of legal justice is to a large extent based on the idea of retribution as Nietzsche already showed with regard to christianity this emphasis on retribution works in such a way that it ascribes individual guilt it personalizes guilt and on the basis of this personalization of guilt personalization is a critical word in here because somehow we need to get back so again i've had the upper and the lower register now you have the manifest and the scientific image you the scientific has to be reapplied into the manifest image through personalization as guilt and on the basis of this personalization of guilt asked for demands violence it asked to repay the violence of the offender for which the offender is made personally responsible to be in return given to him so a symbolical violence or physical violence is explicitly not only justified but actually becomes a moral necessity into this metaphysics of the hangman i think i can guess what camera he has but sony get a sony camera get a get a sigma 16 lens good fast lens quite reasonably priced get that get that focus in fast and sharp and that you find in khan and i think that via nature we can understand as a form of a secularization of a morality that we also find in christianity of course in christianity we also find an emphasis on forgiveness but interestingly enough in the practice of christianity this forgiveness is often so to speak sidelined by an insistence on retribution here in this world and then forgiveness is left to god in the other world and it's for this reason that whenever i hear a description like that i always think i need to be more careful when i talk about other religious traditions because i can understand looking in from the outside i can understand as an adult perhaps looking back at christianity through the eyes of a child the memory via the memory you sort of go back i understand looking at selective cases as a pastor helping people practice forgiveness is a major part of one's job in maintaining a community because without forgiveness community is impossible in this world so this retributive justice which we can find at least in applied christianity throughout history where where there's a strong emphasis on punishment and focault also wrote about that later and where we have like similarly still in the united states today right there is a large part of the it's just interesting and i mean i do this too it's just like oh and focault oh oh my well there he is not a lot to say about him but no focault we're gonna understand christianity through focault okay population in the united state is still very much in favor of the death penalty and as i understand it at least this pro-death penalty attitude is especially strong in the hardcore christian communities hardcore christian is that like hardcore pornography it's hardcore hardcore history am i a hardcore christian in the evangelical communities at least oh there we see this insistence on retributive justice and we kind of find this equally in cant now i think actually this insistence on retribution this metaphysics of the hangman is not only very influential in american death penalty philosophy and on the american right and in american now from what i know he's in macau macau is an interesting place i don't know much about it portuguese colony one of these chinese cities death penalties china evangelical christianity but it also informs the left and it also informs social justice movement and it also informs a wokeism there too we have this kind of a hypermoralism asking for punishment and that's one reason why i disagree strongly with one of the books that was recommended by one of the viewers to me the book is called cynical theories this book explains wokeism wait a minute oh we've got crossover we've got crossover we've got the hoaxers and um my conversation with james lindsey continues to be a a video that is one of the older videos that is regularly watched and see again i really like um uh hans hg i don't know i gotta figure out what to call him maybe maybe we'll do a conversation and um i'll figure out how to say his name right at least matthew pageau see jonathan was easy uh jordan peterson that was simple um um john vervecky well that's that that's that dutch thing i can say i can say a name like vervecky that's almost it's not dutch that's belgian but so oh so and and i really like this because he's you know he's he's outside he's not american and so he can he can give his critiques of american politics he's outside of christianity so he can give us critique about christianity and he's outside this whole realm which okay new information let's let's have it book is called cynical theories this book explains wokeism more or less uh solely as a consequence of um basically european post-modernism and i think that's an extreme reduction i think the wokeism that we see now on the so-called left in the united states and that has in increasingly global influence and that i personally regard as very problematic is equally influenced by this kind of metaphysics of the hangman a certain post-canteon insistence on retributive justice and now that's so interesting because it's okay it's not just post-modernity it's now you have to understand that in their career before they were hoaxers james lindsey and helen pluckrose and peter bagosian were online new atheists and now none of them if you if you ask them because i have none of them are very interested in talking about all the way back to the beginning of this video in case you remember about basically new atheism losing its interest in debunking christianity so well hey we still got rationality rules around he's still liking to do it so but it's very interesting how well we're going to blame them son post-modernity because again well especially the anti-woke new atheists they want to preserve the enlightenment the enlightenment is their in a sense their reformation story so if you grew up like i did in the christian reform church and again i love to point out this book which was written in the 60s you know you you sort of you know here's a church i mean you can just follow here's the temple you know moses and sheep this is a book for you know catechizing young people we'll have some biblical stories the church in the old testament sorry jacob this book is going to offend the holy spirit in the church so you sort of have in christian reform you have moses and then you've got paul and here we have a nice nice youth being catechized right here and oh we got missionaries we gotta get through the new testament lots of new testament stuff of course and then one holy catholic church make sure that's a small c not one roman catholic church the blood of the martyrs so you got stephen he's the he's the best martyr the church falls into sin shortly after the year 300 this is the standard protestant way of doing it shortly after the year 300 all persecution stopped god stopped it in a surprising way and then you have constantin but very quickly um constantin gets forgotten and surely not going to go by constantinople or any of that stuff and we've got some christian missionaries evangelizing the um the genetic the genetic ancestors of my people you know wearing you know the dutchman but then you know before you know it i mean the middle ages just is gone in a blink and god reforms his church so you've got like two pages for constantin out and then of course you've got luther here i stand i can do no other and then you know little little nod is wingly but don't ask him about the lord supper and before you know it we've got calvin ah calvin and that's that's the way we um then we have calvinist churches so that's the way we tell that's the way we tell the story so for for the for the new atheist it's the enlightenment and well fukoh losing the enlightenment but from hg here you're going to get a little bit more of a nuanced story this was very clear very obvious only just a few weeks ago at the derek chauvin trial where we saw particularly on the left a very strong demand an outcry for punishment and an ecstasy of punishment and an media frenzy about just indignation and i think there is a straight line from this precisely not to post-modernism but to the metaphysics of the hangman that we find in kent and that in turn has its root in european christianity so much for today okay so happy me more videos to watch as if i if as if you all weren't still making videos and you know you got grim gris and you got mark and you got vervecky of course makes tons of videos and you got peugeot and yeah jordan peterson still makes i'm still waiting you know i'm i'm kind of waiting for the peterson vervecky peugeot bishop barron video that's that's that's the big one coming up at some point so anyway um super excited about this new youtuber at least new to me super excited about his content and all of this is putting us towards what he really wants to talk about which is identity profiles personhood in this new electronic mediated age of screens and i'm really excited to get into that but before we do that we got to do our homework and we've got to look at conn he's got a nice video out there we've got hagel and marks and nicha so he's got a ton of videos out there that and they're they're quite reasonably short unlike this video unlike my video so you know addressing a different audience so yeah let me know what you think leave a comment and um celebrate with me