https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Aq63lo1f8Ys

 Hi, this is Paul and I want to do another video on frame, God, idolatry, and focus. My last video I did on this topic, I used some footage from Hubert Dreyfus. Now I had seen him on some philosophy videos on the internet. I didn't know much about him. Apparently he was a scholar in Berkeley. He passed away in 2017. Obviously made a big ripple in the AI community when he was teaching at MIT. And a number of other interesting things about him that pertain especially to this, as John Vervecky and Seville King call it, their little corner of the internet with Heidegger and Kierkegaard and some of these issues. Now the Google engine drew me to this video. Dreyfus because I had just been looking at videos of his Heidegger AI and meaning. Well no wonder that Google sent me to this video and in fact it was very germane. It's really quite a nice little movie type video with some good interviews with him. Now the sound from him isn't that great so that's noted in the comments of the video. Not a lot of views on that video but it's a really good interview and I want to do some commentary on this interview as it pertains to all the kinds of things I've been talking about. Let's dive in. Now this is a wonderful little observation about our times and in many ways I'd say what we are are these little godlets and we imagine we see the world through our monarchical vision and we look down on it and we use whatever strength and power that we have in order to create the world we want. In some ways this is a continuous cosmos pre-axial age condition with sort of a faux axial age perspective of the monarchical vision and we imagine we see without filters and we look to optimize our realization from potential and that's right now the presumed assumption of what a good life is and this is promoted in advertising, it's promoted in, it's the subtext of our world and obviously it is not in keeping with a religious perspective, it is not in keeping even with many philosophical perspectives. It's sort of as NT Wright calls this default epicurean perspective that we have of what life should be. Now notice what he just said, let's hear that again. Again the sound quality isn't great but hopefully you can make it out. So Kierkegaard notices nihilism in the present age. Now pay attention to these good things that are all good things but when elevated to ultimate things they are diminished. Maximizing pleasure, if you make the maximization of pleasure an ultimate thing actually because the maximization of pleasure can't be an ultimate thing, now we're going to be talking a lot about idolatry in this video, because it can't be an ultimate thing even pleasure itself is diminished. It's not allowed in a sense to inhabit the space that pleasure was in Christian terms created for. If pushed too far pleasure gives pleasure but it doesn't give ultimate satisfaction or let's say joy. Morality is a vitally important thing but if morality is what you are ultimately about well it too is hollow because it can't fill that space of ultimate importance. Mystical experiences, try to have an experience of attunement and at-one-ment even that if say life is all about these experiences, now remember these as experiences, life is about these experiences then that too falls short. In a sense where we're reading the book of Ecclesiastes in the Old Testament with Colette the assembler or the teacher looking at the world and saying vanity of vanities all is vanity and Kierkegaard noticed this and called it nihilism because there's a vacuum at the top of the hierarchy and other things are being elevated in order to fill that vacuum. Religious, you miss what's really important about human beings. Now even religion as such, if your life is about being religious that fails to satisfy. That they should be totally committed to some particular thing. Okay, so in other words to address this, Dreyfus is saying in his reading of Kierkegaard that you need to have a monarchical focus, not a monarchical vision, you need to have a singular focus and once that singular focus takes in well then suddenly things work better but a lot of it depends on what that focus is and now again we're back into the question of a frame because in a sense what a frame is is the focus through which you see everything else in the world. So if your focus is gaining mystical experiences that will be the frame through which you will assess opportunities and obstacles in order to achieve that. So that singular focus actually is the way that you process your life because you cannot be without a focus. Only then can you be a self that is in despair to talk in Kierkegaard way and we are in this age now where people are not committed. Don't think that that's unfortunate, you're going to suffer, you are. So in other words if you don't have a frame through which to see the world you are going to suffer and I would assert that if you have the wrong frame you are going to suffer. Well the truth is you're going to suffer anyway. Suffering is guaranteed to come to all of us at one time or another in one place or another. You don't find anything in your life that's really fully meaningful and satisfying. In other words if you adopt this pseudo-sense of self-satisfaction and self-satisfaction is something that is really meaningful and satisfying. In other words if you adopt this pseudo-godlet position above all being the ultimate and in many ways the ultimate consumer where everything is simply a vehicle towards satisfaction, consumption, experience. What that means is in a sense you are at the top of your hierarchy and as Kierkegaard noted ironically that's a nihilism because the truth is you are too small to occupy that spot. You are too weak, you are too short-lived, you are too dim-witted. And I am too, there's no exception of that. Something has happened in the secular world where we have taken up that place of highest importance, me the center of the world, and now attempts to govern the world and govern my life and very quickly we realize well I don't have enough power, I don't have enough time, I don't have enough smarts, I don't have enough to actually satisfy myself. Myself as a pond is too shallow, myself as a person is too small and Kierkegaard notes this. And Kierkegaard says that's the present age and I think that's right. It is mainly the view of the present age. I think that's what the students come into the course thinking maybe if I teach it well enough and Kierkegaard is smart enough, which he certainly is, they come out understanding that they better be committed to something and those are the ones who come up to me in the supermarket and say I've changed their lives, of which there's many more than one would have thought. So for Kierkegaard anyway you go through this sphere of existence, that is the way of life of going for keeping all possibilities open and then you go from there to a way of life in which you obey the ethical principles and feel satisfied that you're doing the right thing and then you go through this mystical sort of religious stage in which you try to feel that you're one with the love that moves the sun and the other stars. Kierkegaard has something like that. Now if you go back to Paul Maxwell's and he talked about the different order, I think it was Paul Maxwell's video, a different order of Kierkegaard and how Kierkegaard in a sense inverts the philosophers. I think that's what he's talking about now in terms of this progressive and then we get all the way up until Dante, Dante's beatific vision. That's what we long for, one with the love that moves the sun, the moon and the stars. If you read C.S. Lewis's discarded image you'll get a very clear picture of that medieval model, that medieval image where God is in a sense the greatest, outermost sphere that moves and because of the movement of that sphere all the other spheres move all the way down here to the world. Kierkegaard has something like that, I forget what his is, but anyway and then you get to this thing, you become totally committed to some political cause or to some person or to some idea that tells you who you are. See now here's where Dreyfus and I would part ways a little bit but I think Dreyfus is correct. What happens is that you take this, see he sees Kierkegaard as saying well you arrive at this religious thing and I would say okay and now Dreyfus is saying and look that's the goal, you need to have this frame, this focus and maybe it's a religion, maybe it's a movement, maybe it's an ideology. Now I would at this point say yeah, unless you have the correct thing at the top of your frame you're going to always make a religion out of whatever it is you arrive at and in a sense have this and this is part of my criticism of Peterson and how he sees meaning itself as an internal compass and do what's meaningful and not what's expedient. Now the irony of what Peterson is saying is that politically a lot of the groups that he's opposing are in fact doing something that feels to them as incredibly meaningful because in fact something has moved to the top of their hierarchy. Now I've been talking about this video but I hadn't bothered to trace down the, to track down the moment so I could play it in my video so this morning it was like okay it's time to find that clip and this is from a conversation between Benjamin Boyce and James Lindsay. Now I've spoken with James Lindsay on my channel, I should probably have him back and you know I should do a, I owe Peter Boghossian a book review of their book and I've got some ideas about the book, I have listened to it, I have read it now and I've listened to some other reviews of it and so I do want to talk to Peter Boghossian and James about their book but this was a terrific conversation between Benjamin Boyce and James Lindsay and I thought it went into, Benjamin Boyce is a tremendous interviewer, he really is and it's a real gift that he has and I thought this was a tremendous conversation and what, there's a spat going on right now even in reformed circles with a pastor who's just south of me in Stockton and Shenvy, oh I forget his first name, who's been writing this blog on critical theory and they've been going back and forth and you know the conversation basically revolves around the fact that number one, especially if you're reformed, racism is part of the package, see my conversation with Benjamin Boyce, racism is part of the sin package that we all get, it's an almost inevitable manifestation of human dynamics and our propensity to put ourselves at the top of the hierarchy, the church is always going to have to deal with race. My, what I have seen is that racism itself has now become a pseudo religion, racism itself has come at the top of the hierarchy as sort of as Dreyfus reads Kierkegaard and anti-racism itself and what I noted, see, the fact that you see James Lindsay is a very interesting guy, he's, as an atheist, he's done a lot of study of religion because he lives in the American south and all of his friends are religious people so he wants to figure out what is with religion and what makes it tick. So he's done a lot of deconstructing of religion but now with this whole feud, this schism in the church of atheism between the social justice side and sort of the classical liberal side, James Lindsay has turned his attention to deconstruct them and so he's a very smart guy, he's read their books and he makes this observation in the conversation with Benjamin Boyce that I thought was tremendously important and helpful. Our contention is that yes indeed social justice is postmodern but it has, in the sense of using postmodern methods, but it's taken up a meta-narrative which is what postmodernism is supposed to be wholly skeptical of and that meta-narrative started, I mean it came from the leftist politics and views that were always buried within, say, the original French philosophers and sociologists but it took on a new character in the 1980s and 1990s under the two most prominent figures in this regard would have been Judith Butler working in queer theory but more importantly, Kimberle Crenshaw working at critical race theology critical race theory and critical legal Theology is right legal theory, yeah she is the progenitor of intersectionality, she came up with that term in a paper in 1989 and then pretty much went to town defining and clarifying its need in 1991 and at that point what happened was, and this is the birth of the meta-narrative like I said though that it came out of previous existing political roots, they said that you can't do political work and Kimberle Crenshaw is explicit about what kind of political work, identity political work, you can't do identity politics unless if you're willing to deconstruct everything including identity so she said we're going to start by saying that the postmodern thinkers went too far, they have valuable tools that we will employ, they had valuable insights that we should draw upon but ultimately they were operating from a place of privilege that allowed them to deconstruct even oppression, oppression based on identity in particular and it's a mark of their privilege that prevented them from being able to realize that they were acting in privilege so you could almost say that Kimberle Crenshaw's big idea would be where you have Descartes trying to drill down, I don't want to maybe blow her up to this big of a stature like Descartes but who knows, where you have Descartes drilling down to what's one thing I know I can say is true and he comes out with cogito ergo sum, I think therefore I am, here you have Kimberle Crenshaw drilling down saying what can I know is true after postmodern deconstruction says that there is no such thing as accessible truth and she drills down and she says I am oppressed therefore I am and so she following bell hooks, a black, a very famous black feminist at the time following her came out with a statement that said there's a fundamental and important difference especially if you wish to do identity politics between the statement I am black, I take on black identity versus I am a person who happens to be black which would be the prevailing liberal colorblind if you will interpret you've got a difference there between an essence and an accident of how to deal with the social constructions around race so that amnest then provides you an anchor in this postmodern world so the postmodern world is everything is constantly being deconstructed we're in a sea of chaos and everything that we assemble out of that is tentative at best whereas this is trying to say or reserve one space or one access to objective reality which is I guess the cornerstone also of subjective experience being one's identity and in so far as one's identity is oppressed that magnifies that identity that makes that identity more real than other identities would you say that that's fair? Yeah that's fair that's correct it also makes it more salient and something that people need to pay more attention to and focus on so yes it was definitely a it was a sense of saying you know we can deconstruct many things using postmodern tools we can take apart the glue that holds language and meaning that glues language to meaning for example glue the holds factors of society together even but the one thing that we should not pour any solvent on the deconstructive solvent is oppression based on identity and therefore identity itself as seen identity as defined in terms of group membership through which power dynamics have been applied and then I say group membership I mean the social construction of the group black for example contains many populations if you ask a biologist many different distinct populations of human beings that have slightly different and identifiable genetic markers that you could trace back different populations but black skin means black that's a social construction around that I that around the color of skin actually and so or ethnicity as it were if their skin happens to be very light but they happen to be in that lineage so the one thing that cannot be dissolved is that so in a sense you can actually say that this is a process of making something sacred if you turn back to the religious psychology or the moral psychology Jonathan Haidt is very eloquent on talking about the role of sacredness and taboo that was his most of his early social psychology work was in that and he poses some very disturbing questions if you go read some of his previous books the happiness hypothesis the righteous mind so what this is is a process of making something sacred so identity as defined through socially constructed group membership became a sacred object and in particular it was following the kind of thoughts of Derrida or even following the thoughts of Foucault who were both obsessed with power Derrida how it manifests in language Foucault and how language works to maintain and legitimize it the idea was that those socially constructed groups have to be understood in terms of their oppression versus dominance a binary of power what's called a hierarchical binary that contains a power dynamic and so that was reified in the early 1990s the late 80s leading up to and in the early 1990s such that by probably no later than 1994 or five it was pretty entrenched by early 2000s you had considerable scholars writing there's sort of this last gasp dying gasp for the old forms of scholarship into critical analysis of society which would have been socialist in orientation they called a materialist or radical in orientation but now there's this dying gasp like I remember seeing a paper a last case for materialist feminism or something like that at one point or why we need to bring back materialist feminism and you had people doing post mortems by 2004 2005 of 2006 where no longer is the old way of thinking how we do things we now have this intersectional framework and there's been this massive shift to focusing on identity for the purpose of identity politics and so what happened for this new crop is generations come and generations go and the idea sort of is if you have something that appears to be established as knowledge through the publication in peer reviewed journals and books and then being taught and then a generation goes by the second generation the child generation cites the big thinkers from the moment before and then so then at that point yeah the canon gets built and then in the second generation the grandchild generation starts taking those things for granted everybody's known this for a long time. There you have well now you have your god you have the one thing that cannot be deconstructed you have the one frame in this case the frame of oppression through which you see the entire world and you organize now the difficulty with intersectionality is that we'll continue to diminish diminish diminish because when you look at combinatorial explosion even with respect to matrices of oppression you can it can expand infinitely and then in a sense you're all the way back down to a group of one so critical race theorists realize the weakness of pure postmodernism and so isolates a something to serve as a god in this case an oppressive identity or a matrix or a pathway of identity or a history or a pathway of oppression or a history of oppression and and that then becomes the frame now again in classical Christian terms that is called idolatry because you take something here within the created order doesn't have to be a physical thing doesn't have to be something that well something that you can lay hands on but it can even be a theoretical thing such as a history of oppression you can objectify it you can that then can create the lens through which now you put the top of your hierarchy in your tire world organizes around it now what's interesting is that I'm gonna go back to the the dry fist video here because we actually what we do with these frames is that we create worlds now animals inhabit this sort of half world according to our perspective all kinds of things we can do in front of our dogs and cats and they don't really care because the meaning and significance of them is well it's at our level it's not at the dog and cat level the dog and cats have particular frames that are very limited and very limited to survival and this is why they're so easily colonized that we can in a sense we are more real than our pets and we can colonize them quite easily and in fact the entire history of domestication of animals is an example of this but but now in a sense what the celebrity atheist want to do is take that half world and say that's the dominant world well it really isn't because it's all these other things these theoretical things these things of heaven that we humans can you kind of have the axial an image of the axial split here all these things of heaven that we use to colonize and dominate the things in this half world well we're masters at that and the animals are not so we thoroughly colonize not only animals and plants but raw materials and all of these sorts of things we colonize them thoroughly now again if you read C.S. Lewis's miracles Lewis uses rationality as the language of in a sense the top half of the axial split the axial divide and God then is the source of all rationality and we express it and we use it if you go back to the previous video if you look at you know rationality is as related to this being a rational agent one who can in terms of the life of the mind imagine outcomes and so use manipulate tools and power and work things here in order to achieve outcomes and within that you have the sense of will you have the sense of desire I'm probably going to be doing a lot more with Rene Girard as things move forward because I've been listening to him quite a bit lately and he's colonizing me so I've been finding a lot actually probably going to post this after my conversation with Craig Stewart I had that conversation yesterday so what they don't realize is that this tool these tools that we use are really limited and even for even for what we normally enjoy and that we have this this world creating capacity so let's hear Dreyfus talk about these worlds and here he's going to hang on I'm going to have to find I hate when I forget to put in the forget to put in the I think it's 14 that's why I take the screenshot there we go the animals are world poor what people have when they have worlds now if you're paying attention to these frames these frames are part of our process of creating worlds and these frames focus remember Peterson always says we'll see opportunities and obstacles these frames focus what is an opportunity and what is an obstacle because implicit in every frame is a telos okay it's a goal it's a it's a final purpose or it's a final cause it's the thing that directs us and orients to something far beyond itself now as I continue to get into Rene Girard one of the things that happens with this memetic theater is that well where do we get these where do we get these desires from and not just our instinctual desires that that can be fairly easily satisfied again watch Mary Cohen's video on on on verveky and satisfaction and desire and appetite was really a great video but we have these desires and so we desire something and actually what we do is we desire through others we see glory in another and and we don't just desire to have that glory we desire to be we desire to replace that other and this is exactly so some of you know where I'm going with this that God is in fact the frame of all frames what happens in Genesis three is that we see God and we desire to replace God and well that happens as in terms of when we see God and that is in fact the idolatry now what tends to happen you can look at it through the lens of let's say the book of Romans in the New Testament Romans one we replace other things below for God and and so in a sense if we take on the frame of oppression well it's it's a sort of strange frame and it's a frustrating frame because my identity then becomes one of oppressed but the very nature of that and and the type of frame it is says well we should seek the end of oppression but if we arrive at the end of oppression I lose my identity because of my frame okay and so the frame of oppression has created a world in which well I am I am bound to frustration because the degree to which the the implicit tell us the good tell us of the frame which is end of oppression is realized I lose my identity I lose the ground upon which my entire life is built and now as I talked with John Verbeke in my conversation with him there are many cases of this I keep looking around for the book and actually the Tim Keller book is here counterfeit gods which deals with this question of idols and things that we use to displace God so let's say we take a good thing like family and turn it into an ultimate thing actually if you make your family the goal of your life you will destroy your family because family is too weak a thing to actually construct a world upon romantic love as I mentioned with John Verbeke you make romantic love the goal of your life it you are too small if you if you make the goal to be the object of of romantic love or the pursuit of romantic love well as C.S. Lewis notes all deaths in this world end in all loves in this world end in death or betrayal that's how it works and it can't be any other way so so there's a problem with these frames and and so as now Dreyfus and following Heidegger said well we are world makers the animals don't make these worlds we make these worlds and the problem is if the frame that you're using to make a world is from something within this world you are setting yourself up for suffering and frustration because at least this is the biblical assertion of the apostle Paul that nothing in this world can bear that weight because actually unlike the animals we are C.S. Lewis calls us amphibious we get into this word spiritual which is this upper end of the axial divide the animals aren't there we are there and the difficulty is if you take anything beneath in the animal or below layer in this world and make that your frame even let's say a history of oppression or the desire for romantic love or anything within this world you make that your frame you are you are making a less than adequate world and a world that will be bent towards ultimate frustration and disaster and the biblical terminology for that is in fact idolatry. We have a world each of us and there's a shared world too that we all have and creative people can disclose new worlds I think that's right and it's hard to understand what it is to be a creative person and disclose new worlds but it's got to do with having a completely new take on something important that people have all got wrong and which you have this kind of moment of a how if you get it right. Now in terms of idolatry what I'm saying and this is really complicated and sort of hard to get your head around there are frames and sub frames and there's only one thing that is legitimate the main frame and if you have that main frame you can have lots of sub frames and that affords exactly what Heidegger is saying because well Tolkien called us sub creators so if there is the creator we can be sub creators because what we do and what we're built for is actually to take the things of this world and from them make glory. This is what's called the cultural mandate in the beginning of the book of Genesis that be fruitful and multiply and have dominion over the earth. Now this dominion is not intended to be an exploitative dominion but a fruitful glory making dominion and so what Heidegger is looking at here is this mandate that we've been given to find things in the world and make worlds out of them and we do that all the time we make worlds of music we make worlds of culinary arts we make worlds of psychology we make worlds of philosophy we make worlds of family life we make worlds of community life we make worlds in art we make worlds in all sorts of things and that world making is in fact says Genesis 1 what we are made for because in a sense part of why we're made we are made for glory we are made to basically do what the God does and multiply it and that's part of the reason we find so much joy in it that's part of the reason glory is this powerful idea back to God 1 and God 2 holy holy holy is the Lord God Almighty God number 2 the whole earth is full of His glory it's built in so that God is the system of all systems and so what we do is we being the mirror of both God number 2 and God number 1 we act like God number 2 come into this world make worlds out of it for our enjoyment the enjoyment and flourishing of the community and for the glory of the original God and I can think of one kind of example of that which I've been interested in there's some sense in which Steve Jobs is just for his new world when he opens the idea of the iPhone the iPad and the movies the digital movies what do you call it the thing that he's Pixar movies he's invented about five totally new different ways of having a world and having activities and that's pretty amazing and that's what we are made to do we are made to we are made to make worlds now but we don't realize that that that these tools now what we get into then is this this idea of rules and I'm not sure if I'm remembering the video I'll let it play a little bit more may not be such a nice thing to disclose but so so what am I saying that you need to know about what it is to disclose worlds in order to understand what it is to lose worlds too it's true that to disclose the world you've got to give up the previous one that was some kind of misunderstanding when I was something like discovered in the world and that's different than my brother we each did it in a different disclosing of a different world so with me at MIT I came to MIT to teach at just the time when everybody was interested in computers and believed that we would okay I'm going to jump ahead to the to the next point now rationality again we talked a little bit about the celebrity atheist rationality itself is last point that he makes in this video doesn't really get you there because this this consciousness is a is an extremely powerful tool and and within consciousness we can we can marshal intentionality and we can focus action and these are extremely powerful tools but now in this in this last segment he notes that in a really strange way this tool can't even get us as far as common things in our life demonstrate to us it doesn't work for driving it doesn't work for basketball let's let's look at this last let's see if I put the link in here yeah everybody gets to be if they're hardworking and take risks and so forth an expert at something or a master if you really want to go all the way and and it's something that since everybody has had this experience it's odd that philosophers never explained the experience worse they totally mis-explained it that's why they misunderstood the computers and thought they could be intelligent they thought being intelligent was having the the right rules in your mind and the right descriptions in your mind now again go back to the Jordan Peterson Matt Dillahunty video maybe one of these days I should play that one in here but that's exactly the nexus of their disagreement that Dillahunty is saying well what we can do is we can we can take the world and we can make it into objects and then we can manipulate these objects and with this manipulation and with rationality we have the power to construct for ourselves the world of our desires and and and Jordan Peterson says not anywhere near not anywhere close and here Dreyfus is basically making the same point and in fact it wasn't like that at all and then he has it the first stage it's true you need I'll give an example from chess and from driving chess is very disembodied driving is obviously very embodied both of them equally have this three five or six page stage structure I say six because my brother doesn't like this stage he stopped his work stopped at this stage and master is really like world is closer it's so if he's not being a mathematician he does now he's got a six step thing that he has written on the blackboard for those of you who are just listening first stage is novice second stage is advanced beginner third stage is competence fourth stage is proficiency I can't read the fifth stage might be efficiency or expertise or something like that and then the six stages master these are the stages that he's talking about he's pointing to the board and the sounds a little bit better in this part because they've they've switched they've switched format and they fixed the sound fifth stage is expertise competence advanced beginners and novice stages one through three he's pointing to proficiency proficiency proficiency is going to be the way an expert thinks an expert doesn't think he just does what works and what has normally worked for him and it will normally work and what has normally worked for him, and it will normally work. Now this is John Ortberg, who was a pastor in Menlo Park Presbyterian, was in a sense, did for Dallas Willard what I'm doing for a series of people through my videos, okay? In some ways that's how you can understand my project in parallel to what John Ortberg did for Dallas Willard. And Dallas Willard said there's a difference between trying and training, and what we actually do a lot, this is a fairly popular phrase in Christianity right now in some circles, it's called Christian formation, and it means what we do all the time is that we train, we embody, and this really gets into a lot of Vervecki's work in terms of his idea of play, where we're training and we're molding ourselves, and so it's not that our greatest achievement comes simply through what we're able to do in this conscious space, but you get into a flow state, and in fact you get into communal flow states, and it's not technically rationality that some celebrity atheists want to point to and say, well this is our highest state. No, in fact it isn't our highest state because when you're thinking, after you've become a proficient driver, thinking about driving as you're thinking about it can muck up your driving, and I think actually a better illustration of this is shooting a basketball, and for sports people they create all of this muscle memory. Look at a quarterback in the NFL, they don't have time to sit there and think, but their brain, and when we say think in this term we mean consciously going through a whole bunch of steps, but they are in fact thinking, their brain is in fact working, and they have in some ways transcended the limitation of the individual self, and in this flow state become one with what's happening in the field, and they get into the flow and they simply act, and I think part of the reason we enjoy watching high level basketball or football or for y'all Canadians over there, hockey or whatever sport you're into, part of the reason or fast chess, part of the reason we like that is because part of us recognizes the flow state and to a degree participates in it. It's like watching dancing because all of these highly integrated body and mind and he's going to get into that at the end of this segment here because it's very much body and mind, it's heaven and earth, the Bible is about the unification of heaven and earth, and in fact what happens in Genesis 3 is the division, the divorce, the splitting, the alienation of heaven and earth, and so we actually achieve what we feel we're meant to achieve when we're in that space, when body and mind come together purely and the conscious rationality, this space in which we're sort of walking through steps gives way to this flow state and off we go, and that's really what he's talking about in this segment. So the chess, a master chess player or an expert chess player just can make within a few seconds a high level move and that's what's exciting about expertise and in driving just automatically your foot comes up from the gas or goes on the brake and if you start thinking about why you should do this or when you should do this you stop doing it well, that kind of thoughtful reflection is in the way of expertise and that's important because that's what I consider sort of the breakthrough, for 300 years at least which is how long it's been since Descartes or maybe even for a thousand years philosophers have thought that the more thinking you do, the more analysis you do, the better the performance will be and what Stuart just contemplating driving in chess, two things he knows how to do like an expert, saw that that's extremely wrong, all this thinking about... Again, stages one, two and three he's pointing out. What to do and memorizing what to do is getting in the way of the spontaneous doing, of course you can't just start that way, you've got to have lots of experience, take risks, lose some time, win some time, but if you do all that and you do... That's the training versus trying or it's really in a sense training versus this sort of rational, intentional thinking within a conscious frame that's one step upon another that so occupies our monofocal consciousness field. All of a lot, then you can get to the point where you don't think anymore and then you're really good, then you're a pro. That's what the chess expert does, he just sees the right move and makes it. You can play blitz chess if you're a master, which means you can make a move in about three seconds or something after you see the previous move and you're still being played at master level and you won't be thinking at all. Perhaps there's something higher, namely intuition that you have to have, which is leading you to see the situation in such a way that it draws you immediately to do the appropriate thing. I really want to be careful with this move he makes here because it's made often and it's made in sort of this, what do they call it, a Mary Jane move in terms of one of the Star Wars movies, that intuition. Intuition that has been honed and formed and worked through. It's the intuition of the master, not the intuition of the novice, because the novice has plenty of intuition but they have no skill. That intuition in a sense has not been trained and this is where in a sense rationality and intuition come together, the left and the right brain. This is where they're actually working together and it's all coming together. I don't want to just simply say intuition because it's really this trained, honed, formed, practiced intuition. Somebody runs onto a basketball court and starts just chucking up shots. Well that's intuition. LeBron comes onto the basketball court and starts shooting. Well that's training and that's training and intuition and it all flows together. And then there's something harder to describe, which my brother did. This is the revelation that philosophers have been 180 degrees wrong for the whole history of philosophy, thinking that rules and facts and reflection was the way to become intelligent and expert. All you needed to do is just pay attention to your own experience. The reason Stuart could do it is he's never read a philosophy book in his life at that point. He maybe has read some since. He was a mathematician, an applied mathematician. He had to just look at what he was doing when he was driving and what he was doing when he was playing expert level chess. And he did and he saw this and it changed. It didn't change the whole world but it did change a lot of the way people learned a lot of skills that are now sort of devoted to repeating his views about these things. And it sort of turned the idea about how the mind works when you're an expert upside down. And that to me from inside philosophy was a big revelation. And then I realized that Heidegger was onto that. Heidegger talks about how when you have to become skilled in dealing with the world and when you are, you're absorbed. That's his word. You're absorbed in the situation. So if you're a carpenter, you could be an expert carpenter. But if you're really, really a good carpenter, you would just, the hammer withdraws, Heidegger says, the hammer. And this in a sense is again the reunion of heaven and earth because it's the union of mind and body. And I don't mean brain and body. Brain and body are always united but mind and body. And again, it's what we were talking about. Disappears and you sort of disappear into this activity. And that's, we are a tiny being that's absorbed, that can be absorbed in what they're doing. And when they are, it brings them out at their best. That's the moral of this skill story. But of course, you need to be absorbed in the right thing because someone who is trying to weaponize smallpox or something like this, they can be absorbed in that. And again, this is the weakness of Jordan Peterson's meaning as internal compass. Do what is meaningful. Well maybe weaponizing, maybe weaponizing smallpox feels meaningful or maybe writing some mass shooter manifesto feels meaningful. Meaning in and of itself won't necessarily lead to, see the goal is not just me flourishing, which would be solipsistic, me all by myself. The goal is all of heaven and earth flourishing. That's what Christianity seeks. It's the flourishing of heaven and earth. So let's get this next up. So God is the ultimate, ultimately productive frame in Christianity because if it's just again about my meaning and my flow, well that's going to leave everyone else in a sense in isolation. Now how does this work? Well God is the frame of all frames. And if you go all the way back to the beginning of the video that I've been playing through this of Dreyfus, God is the one thing and connecting it to the James Lindsay Benjamin voice, God is the one thing you don't deconstruct. Well see that's not actually true because if you listen to Rene Girard and the CBC interviews, which are just tremendous, I'll put a link to them below if I remember. And if I don't remember, just leave a comment and then I'll put a link in the comments. But God is this weird frame that includes everything in a sense except evil. So it's the good of all goods. It's the frame of all frames. And as Kierkegaard and Dreyfus following Kierkegaard notes, you cannot be happy. You will be subject to nihilism unless you are devoted to something. But now again, you can be devoted to all kinds of things. But any other thing within this world that you are devoted to will lead your life towards an inevitable frustration and disaster. And actually what hell is, if you read C.S. Lewis's The Great Divorce, what hell is, is people taking lesser frames and refusing to give up on them. And you can in fact find people in C.S. Lewis's The Great Divorce focusing on a frame of having been oppressed or focusing on a frame of having been hurt or focusing on a frame of somebody else's hurt or harm. And what hell is, is people who are so, they've simply become their lesser frame. And as C.S. Lewis says, they began by grumbling and that formation kicked in and all they became was a grumble. They're not even a frame anymore. They've just become this tiny little minimalist frame. And in fact I would assert that you can watch people, if you know people over long periods of time, you can watch this happen in people's lives. They start out being bitter and their bitterness just makes them smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller. So they start out being a bitter person and all they wind up being is bitterness. And this is very much an image of hell. And C.S. Lewis points this out in his book The Great Divorce. So you must devote yourself to something but then the question is what? Well I find this satisfying. Okay, devote yourself to that. But if you make that your God, you are going to have a problem. And so what God is the frame of all frames. And because this God is above everything that's below here, again this is following Paul in the book of Romans, the first chapter of Romans. If you follow God and have God be the frame of all frames and devote yourself to God, as C.S. Lewis says, you put first things first and you'll have room for everything else. Because within God, you actually can see, C.S. Lewis says God is the sun and through which, it's the beam of light, through which I can see the rest. And now if God is the frame of all frames, you can participate in other frames and enter even in flow states in other frames, but it won't destroy you. If you make your oppression your main frame, the oppression matrix that you, by virtue of your birth or by virtue of your experience, have been subject to, well as I said before, if you make that your frame, that becomes your identity. And what you actually do is perpetuate the oppression because the oppression has to, you have to keep being able to find the oppression because once you stop finding it, you lose the frame through which you see your life and you lose your identity. And that's why oppression is in fact an idolatry and it's a dead end and it leads to hell. And that's how Christian theology leads. You ask, well, what is hell? Well, it's a multi-layered thing. Hell is what happens if you take a lesser frame and despite, and again, C.S. Lewis plays this out with the angels trying to talk people out of their frames, you try, you persist in saying, this is my frame, this leads to hell. And it leads to hell on earth and Lewis of course believes that, well, with Kierkegaard and many others that, well, if you, if in fact you are an everlasting being and you live forever and you maintain that frame, well, you are just always going to maintain that frame. And what happens is your frame will get smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller because you are not that big. So you must devote yourself to something and if you give your heart primarily to something, you can give your heart secondarily to whole ranges of things in a very healthy, safe way because your heart is primarily focused on the one thing that cannot be corrupted, the one thing that is deep enough to include all. And that's where God number one comes in. The whole earth is full of His glory. If you devote yourself to God, you will love your neighbor as yourself. You will love the animals. You will love the creation. You can love nature. You can love music. You can love everything that is within God's creation that is, that has not been horribly twisted. You can love that eternally. And what that means is that in a sense, the beatific vision, once you love the lover, you love everything the lover loves. And in fact, then in the new creation, you can devote yourself to science or to animals or to music or to wine or to all kinds of things because it's all within the one frame. Okay? If you devote yourself to anything in this world, you will be less than that thing because again we are made to, the animals are down here. We are made with this other capacity to be above them, to be able to colonize them, to be able to, but cannot colonize them in an exploitive way but colonize them in a way that creates more glory. And so domestication of animals should bring the glory out of them and manifest the glory that's present within them. Now as we do that today, I look at my tiny little dog at home and think, that thing came from a wolf? But there's a certain degree of glory that my little dog has that a wolf doesn't have. There's also a degree of diminishment that my dog has, not just in size, than the wolf and that again is part of the fact that we are broken fallen creatures. Everything we do is diminished. We are poor sub-creators, but we are made to finally be glorious sub-creators that can in increasing measure manifest and realize the glory of the frame of all frames. As the book of Hebrews says, you're made a little lower than the angels. If you devote yourself to God, God assigns you flexibly to serve everything in this world. Now you look at Jesus Christ and you read the Gospels, Jesus is the servant of all. But what does that mean? That means that God, who is in a sense the frame of all frames, is also in another way invisible. God is so humble, he doesn't keep intruding into the glorious, the glory project that I've made this illustration in a number of places. If there is a baker who makes the most glorious cakes that you can know, what that baker does is puts the cakes out there and enjoys watching the glory of the cake do its thing. And others want to be like the baker because of the glory, but the baker holds back and watches. If the baker were to be less humble and intrusive, the baker would say, that's my cake, that's my cake, that's my cake. What the God does is say, nope, nope, I, the glory is all over the world, I give it to you freely and I want to see what you're going to do with it. I want to see you as my child take the things of this world and make them glorious. Take wheat and take sugar and take color and take all of the, and take milk and take all of this artistry and make a glorious cake. Take sound vibrations and make glorious music. I want you to make glory in this world and I will enjoy you enjoying me. That's the Christian vision. So God assigns you flexibility, but in order to do this you must be the servant of all and you must in fact be making glory in a very humble way so that the glory is not diminished and so that you give glory to others. So, so, so you, in order to have the frame of all frames, you become the servant of all. This is exactly what Jesus teaches his disciples and if you do this, just as he does with, just as he does with Christ, this is Philippians 2, God takes the servant of all, this is how God works with these inverting these hierarchies, takes the greatest of all, becomes the servant of all and once again becomes the greatest of all. And that is in fact the path that we follow, having the frame of all frames as our primary frame and then being able to play in all of the other frames because if, again, if you make one of these other frames the dominant frame, that frame begins to colonize you and again that's called idolatry. So you can become a master and this is a gift of the spirit and this is trying, formation, this is what happens in the practice and the play of the Christian life that bit by bit the stuff gets into you and you become like the Christ. That's the goal of the Christian life, of becoming like Christ and that is in a sense Christianity and it's not necessarily your rational control and this is something you learn in the Christian life because you think, okay, this is how, this is how I'm going to live my life and with that kind of planning, it's sometimes the case that what slips into that planning is another little frame from below here and that frame starts to dominate and so what God does is he breaks you out of that frame usually by bringing suffering into your life and says, no, I am going to make a new frame for you. Make me the frame of all frames and I will help you to learn how to make glory which is built into all of the stuff I have made the world through. I think that's my last slide so, yeah, let me know what you think.