https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=oZ66fyUPP8U

 Hi, this is Paul and this face may look familiar to you. This is Jesse and we had our first talk was about Joe. We've had a talk about Peter Rollins. Yeah, Peter Rollins. A couple of weeks ago after our Discord question and answer, I was busy with something else but I had the Discord voice chat on in the background, and I heard Jess talking about Estuary and he made a couple of points and I don't even remember what they are anymore. But I remember I think I've got to talk to him about this because given our conversation with Peter Rollins, this is going to be another angle on this. So thanks, Jesse, for agreeing to come back on the channel and give me your time. Thanks, Paul. I mean, I appreciate it a lot. It's a... I've been following closely with what you've been doing with the Estuary stuff and I've been kind of a lurker on the Discord and commenting every now and then. But it's been a source of encouragement and a space for me to think about stuff. So, yeah, everything... It's been so positive in my life that just being able to talk about more what this could be is exciting. Well, we'll share, you know, part of... I know I put out this word Estuary and as Joey said, it kind of became a Rorschach test and everybody saw in it what they wanted to. So what did you see and what struck you or what grabbed you about it? Well, a lot of it has already been said, just sort of the space that's in between. So... and then John and Peugeot's idea of something outside the walled garden where you can interact with things. But it's separate from the church, which should be the center, but it's not all the way out in the world. So all that, but then just thinking through my own history and kind of how something like an Estuary, you know, would have been really useful for me as, you know, like a young guy growing up in evangelical Christianity to have that resource to go to and be able to think out loud with some people. And so, yeah, probably everything I'm going to say today is directly from that perspective, just like Christian, evangelical and kind of like why I think the church... Like, what are reasons that the church should get on board with something like this? I think the comments that I talked about on the Discord, I just kind of relayed that I had spoken to my pastor about Estuary and I don't have the words for it. So I was kind of like fumbling and like, you know, the guy, Paul VanderKlay, that I'd listened to and then talk about stuff, well, there's all this Discord server and I tried explaining to him what's going on. And then... And so he was like, oh, that's super cool. And then I told him, like, wouldn't it be cool to have the kind of space that's kind of in between the church and the world? And he immediately just was like, he framed it in evangelism terms. And so he's like, oh, yeah. He's like, why don't you just, you know, and immediately went to sort of, you know, find someone that you can talk to and try to bring them to Christ. You know, that was kind of his... And I couldn't explain why Estuary is different than that at the time. And so I kind of just like, all right. So, but... So and then my other comment was, yeah, just how useful it would be for me, because I kind of went through the it's almost a cliche at this point, a deconstruction phase. And then I've kind of come out of that. Well, why don't you flesh that out a little bit more, because not everybody's going to go over and re-listen to our conversations. So I grew up, my parents got saved when I was like eight. So I basically grew up evangelical. We grew up in a Nazarene church. But quickly after that, when I was about 13, my parents started doing missions work with YWAM. And in part of all that missions work, I was involved in ministry. So I was like in little dance troupes and getting crowds so that someone can preach to them. Getting crowds so that someone can preach to them. Yeah, it worked better in some countries than others. And so I was very heavily involved in ministry and missions work. And it was all non-denominational because YWAM is kind of non-denominational. But it does have a very evangelical flavor, maybe even like Southern Baptist-ish flavor. It depends though, it can get kind of charismatic. YWAM is such a loosely affiliated organization that there's everything from cults to very conservative. In some ways, it's a parachurch like YWAM in some ways is more quintessentially evangelical. Than a denomination, or certainly than a denomination, but even than a non-denominational church. I mean, in some ways, and I'm not taking anything against, I'm not saying anything against YWAM. It's just when we try to think about what we're talking about when we're using that word evangelical. YWAM is pretty close to the center there. Yeah, so it's a lot of Bible-centered, spirit-led, kind of active Christian ministry. So after high school, I wanted to go full-time at YWAM. And I pursued that for about four years. I did some training with them and then led some led training with them. I was on staff for a while. And then I got to a point where I was going to business school and I was in YWAM. And I kind of came to a breaking point where God wasn't telling me what to do. And so in some fervent seeking, he kind of released me to follow... Well, he basically asked me what I wanted to do back. I was like, please tell me what to do for crying out loud. I don't know what to do. I'm 20-some years old, 21, 22. I don't know what I'm doing. God, just tell me something so that I can do it. Just tell me something so that I can have some security or whatever that I know this is the right path forward. And God quickly did not say anything to me. And then asked me, what do you want to do? And I immediately knew. And he's like, just go do that. And I went to college for audio engineering. I was going to go produce music. And this was the first step of a cascade down into deconstruction valley. So I'm 40 years old. This is early 2000s. So 2001, 2000, through 2000... I don't know. It was like 2012 before I kind of got through maybe 2013 or 2014, where it felt like I was kind of making steps up instead of just... So I went through the whole deconstruction phase. And the main feature of it, looking back on it, was that there was so much emphasis in evangelicalism about certainty of belief and holding on to faith no matter what, that basically you're supposed to suppress all doubts. And all doubts are kind of the evil one that's coming in at you, trying to steal your... Whatever certainty you have about your faith. So when I'm deconstructing, I've... I felt like God just sort of had let me go. But it wasn't like I was fault. It was... I even have like... There was a specific moment. I was on my mountain bike in Colorado. And so great mountain bike trails in Colorado. I would go mountain biking every day. And so I was on my bike and I had paused and I was just resting there. And I was thinking about this next step as I was leaving YWAM and going to college. And I got this sort of feeling that God was like, I'm gonna... In a way, God was letting me go. And I wasn't gonna have the security that I thought I was gonna have by him telling me what to do. And I was thinking about this a while ago, and the symbolism of me being on my bike is because what does a dad do with their kid on the bike? Eventually the dad lets go and the kid is supposed... So that was my moment when God kind of like, let me go. But this immediately went into all sorts of... So I just followed the postmodern stuff that was going on. Online spaces were just starting to open up. There was MySpace and some forums and whatnot. And so yeah, just lots of thinking and chatting with people and typing stuff out. And found Peter Rollins. And at the bottom of Deconstructed Valley, I kind of think of Peter Rollins as like the ferryman that got me across the marshlands so I didn't sink and die. Because he's still Christian. Well, he's a theist of some kind. So I never let go. I basically kind of held on to just God and everything else could go if it needed to. And a lot of it did. So 2005, I get married. 2006, I have a son. 2011, I have another son. 2009, I had another son. And 2011, so I got three boys. So all through as my family's growing up, I'm trying to figure something out. And all this is internal. Like outside, I'm going to church. My wife is Christian and we just kept going to church. And so I was having to deal with all these issues in basically online spaces. There wasn't a whole lot of people face to face that I could talk with. Although I did have a couple friends that every now and then a deep conversation would come up with, but it was nothing on a regular basis. So let's see. So I've kind of let go of everything but God and or God's let go of me somehow. And the things that are like in the front of my mind is basically just these divided world concepts, like religion and science. Like I don't know what to do about that. You know, Rollins isn't even talking about it. And this is like, so I'm like trying to figure out, I'm like, you know, I don't, I had a didn't like what the creationist guys were doing. You know, God bless them. I couldn't get on board with that. You know, who is the more progressive Genesis? I forget. But Peter, Peter ends. What's the organization that there was an organization by logos or something. By logos. Yeah, that's that's my tribe. It's Calvin College. Oh, nice. So I was trying to get into that. Those things and I was trying to bridge that divide. And then also the, you know, this is right when social justice is getting stirred up. The whole thing and and like, you know, social justice as it was a part of the conversation since I was a teenager, you know, in the late 90s, because as a cross cultural missionary, we were, you know, we were so aware in our neck of YWAM that that we didn't want to bring Western culture to these people. We wanted to bring Christ. Right. And this may have actually precipitated my deconstruction because then I'm like, do I even understand my culture? That's a hugely important point that I haven't heard enough people make because in my missionary experience, again, this is that perspective on, you know, these different waves of missionary, these different missionary waves. And so kind of a post-mortem to 19th century classical missionaries that, well, boy, they sure imported us. And so I think that's a really important point. And so now when we do it at the end of the 20th century, we're going to be very careful and we're just going to give them the gospel, but not the culture. And in a lot of ways, that idea is fairly deeply set in the DNA of neo-evangelicalism, too, because it wants to say here in the United States, you had this patchwork of immigrant communities, and you had this patchwork of the idea of the gospel. And then you had some, you had some Native American Christianities such as Jehovah's Witnesses, LDS, those are really Native American Christianities because they spring up in America and separate from Native American religions, which are pre-Columbus. But I think that's a really important point that I think we need to be careful about. Native American religions, which are pre-Columbus. But I think that as people are working through the social justice conversation within the realm of evangelicalism, that point that you made is not sufficiently thought through, because a lot of this comes out of a greater attentiveness to culture and missionary efforts. So I just wanted to mark that. That was really good. And a lot of what was kind of considered cutting edge in the YWAM world was this kind of thinking, like that we needed to, like when you go over, you learn language, but not only that, you need to learn their culture and you need to adopt some of their ways that make sense. And this is like, you have to be discerning and you have to be wise about it, because you don't want to adopt some sort of demon worship. And then, this is the balancing act that while I was in ministry that people were talking about. And the YWAM base in Colorado Springs is targeted towards the 1040 window. So it's North Africa and South Asia, and it's unreached peoples that have never heard of Jesus. So they're training people to go specifically to people who have no idea even about Western culture sometimes, and then try to present the gospel to them. And usually involves just language learning and culture learning and all that stuff. And I met quite a few like crazy characters, like when I was in India, there was this YWAM guy, and he felt called to minister to the Hindu holy men who basically live in the temple, and they wear robes, and I guess they just get food from offerings and stuff, so they don't have jobs or anything. And they're very ascetic, and they'll do strange practices to try to show their faith show devotion or ascend or what, you know, I don't understand that. But this YWAM guy, man, he's this white dude, but he grew out these huge long dreadlocks like they do. He wore the robe, he lived in the temple, he basically adopted the Hindu holy man life. And, you know, in order to bring Christ to them. And I just remember that, like, I felt so, you know, I felt so divorced from my own culture. And so I really wanted to, yeah, I guess I really wanted to get into it. I really wanted to, as much as this, as this white guy with dreadlocks, yeah, into it. Yeah. So anyway, so these are kind of the things that I've been trying to do, and I think kind of the things that I'm like trying to puzzle out, like I'm trying to get down to like the what the core of the gospel is without, you know, stripping off all of the colonial trappings and the American nationalist trappings and the, you know, all this stuff. And then you're, you know, all the way down to like where you're questioning, you're like, you know, what was Paul's additions to the New Testament actually good? You know, maybe Paul was wrong, and we just need to get, you know, stick with the Gospels or whatever. Or getting down, you know, or taking the other route where you're like, maybe we need to get to the historical Jesus and, you know, what if there's no hell? You know, why do we have this doctrine about hell? And so, you know, I'm following guys like Rob Bell and, yeah, just kind of going down the path where the liturgists went or, but I never really went as the liturgist started taking off, I was kind of like starting to check out because I couldn't take any more deconstruction. So, yeah, so at the bottom of Deconstruction Valley, Peter Rollins ferries me across. And then I have to find something. So, you know, it was probably, it was a few years before I ran into Peterson. And then Peterson was the one that melded the scientific and religious, put together, like, you know, I think I said this before in our other talk was that, like, you know, I had two worlds in my head and he just, he's like, it's the same thing, you know, and thanks to you and John the pageo, like, you know, I've, so then I started following you because, you know, Peterson's good, but you were, you were like breaking it down into a Christian framework that I actually knew about that I grew up with. So, and then, you know, I'm an animator and just like very visually oriented. So, pageo has been super helpful just trying to, you know, establish what the proper view is. And, you know, with the benefit of hindsight, I was deconstructing some sort of Christian materialism. And, you know, so now, so now I feel like I'm actually like oriented and, and all of what you're doing and it's been going on the Discord stuff has been, it's just, it's been so helpful. And, so, yeah, I just want to be a part of something, you know, that's going to help make this possible for other people. Yeah. So what do you think, what, what do you think is helpful? And what have you found helpful for yourself? I mean, because that's really, I mean, because I said estuary and then so I was like, oh, yes, well, what, give it to me. It's like, I don't think it's something I give to you. I think it's something we do together. And on, where was it? It was, it was on the post question and answer conversation, I think. It was on the post question and answer conversation last week. The recording got messed up, messed up. So that Q&A, I might take some snippets out and put them in the Vanderclips channel. I missed last week too. Okay. Well, maybe I'll figure out something to do with it. There were issues with sound. Rick and I are playing with equipment and sometimes the, sometimes the recording is a casualty. So, I understand. Yeah, I'm sure you do understand. But, you know, I mentioned, I mentioned to someone that, you know, estuary is a, is a feminine space. And suddenly for a couple of people, things just clicked for them. Because if you look at Peugeot's masculine and feminine, you know, architecture, you know, it's a, you know, it's a feminine space that a lot of males are drawn to at this point. But it's a, but it is a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, but it is a, it is a feminine space in that it's, it's more attention oriented and it's spatial rather than, you know, not rather than Mary's words, penetrating potency. So it's not female, it's feminine in that sense, if you think about feminine and masculine. And so estuary isn't really, you know, I plan to continue facilitating it, but it's, I see it as a space in which probably masculine things emerge. Right. And, but, and, and so I think as part of, you know, there's an interesting, there's an interesting dynamic in masculine and feminine, because on one hand, feminine can be very open, but feminine, feminine can also be quite directive. And, and, and, and in my, in my experience, a space like this, it's important to, you know, it's important to be patient, a lot of watching and waiting, trying things out. And then when you see something sort of govee or say, okay, that's, that's probably not what we want to do right there. I might not have been able to tell you not to do that before I saw it, but now I see it. I think most of us can agree. If you want to do that, do that someplace else. So, yeah, it's, it's really similar to how, in a lot of ways, how YWAM operates, because I don't know if you know a lot about YWAM, but it was kind of started out of the Jesus Movement and by a guy named Lauren Cunningham. And, and Lauren kind of had this vision of young people going to the ends of the earth on waves, like waves crashing on the shores. And they were all young people. So he has this vision. And then they just started basically buying property to run schools to figure out how to listen to God and then go do what he says. So, and, and then they would raise up leaders and then they'd just be like, all right, go. And they would go send them out and they would go buy up a property somewhere like a house or a building and start their own YWAM base. And so like, that's, that's kind of how YWAM grew is just, they were so like, kind of, it's very loosey goosey. So, so like, I kind of joked earlier about they're being cults in YWAM. And I mean, it's, it's not necessarily an entirely a joke because some bases will get cult like, and they'll, they'll go down some road that is just not good in all kinds of super fundamentalist or they'll, some guy will have a vision and then now they're like prepping for the end of the world or, you know, I, you know, I don't know if those, you know, examples exactly happen, but, but basically the YWAM leadership's role is to just go to those places and be like, all right, we're cutting this off. We're not, you know, You're no longer a YWAM. Yeah, either you're no, usually, usually they'll kick the leaders out and, and they'll be like, all right, we need a new leader. And they'll actually kind of get someone from somewhere else to come in and kind of like rehabilitate the disaster that they're in. Rehabilitate the disaster that just happened, you know, and sometimes those people will go off and they'll continue their thing or whatever. And then, you know, and then there's times when, when the leadership of YWAM will go and they'll help start a new base. So like there's a, there's a couple where, or maybe like a group of people, they're like, we want to start a base here. And then they'll help kind of at least get them situated and organized to, you know, get that going. And, but, but other than that, like there's all kinds of flavors of YWAM bases all over the place. And, and that's kind of the strength of YWAM and the weakness of it is because you can do whatever you want. And that's great. And it's also the downside that people can just do whatever they want. Yeah. So it doesn't have like the, like, my church right now is a Southern Baptist Church and like the Southern Baptist mission. They're just like, that's, that thing is a giant machine that just runs and it's hugely, you know, effective and they've got giant budgets and they're just like ding, ding, ding, ding, ding. And YWAM is just like, what do you want to do this month? Yeah. So, but anyway, bring it back to SQA. I knew YWAM a bit because their Mercy Bada'ona where I worked in the Dominican Republic has had a port. And so the YWAM ships would come in there with some regularity. I had some YWAM missionaries who lived, lived with me in my home for a number of months and they were wonderful. And the, the, it was very interesting the way they work because I understand it a lot better now, now listening to the description that you made looking back on it, because that's very much the culture and, and there are some really powerful upsides to that. And there are some downsides to that. And I saw both of them in my, you know, in my collaboration with them, but they were, I mean, they were two, they were two a person, just godly, wonderful, terrific people to work with. And I, I really enjoyed my, all my collaboration with them. That's good. Yep. The Mercy ships are one of those parts of YWAM that's like really got their act together. Well, cause you have to. You have to with a ship. That's right. That the consequences, there's no, there's no, we're going to navigate into this Harbor and we're just going to go where the spirit leads and all that captain's like, here's the map. This is the route. This is how much fuel we have. This is how much supplies we have. This is where we go. Yep. So, but, but I really like how you've been kind of handling this is as people are clamoring for kind of structure. And then you've been kind of just like, let's just see what this is. And, and so I, yeah, I appreciate that. And I think, I wonder if, I think that's one of the values of the estuary. You talked earlier, I think it was Sam, you're like, it's caught more than it's taught. And I, I think that's, that's one of the strengths. And, and maybe now would be a good point to kind of just go into like, why would a church want to do this? And because, so, so I had this whole sort of deconstruction journey and it's that U-shaped journey. And I'm, you know, hopefully over here and I'll probably have another U-shaped journey at some point or something. But, but so why would a church want to help a kid with deconstruction and then, you know, hypothetically, like, why would you want someone to go through that? And well, like John and Pajow in your talk with him and with you and Verveki, he was like, that's the, that's the story. That's the breakdown of meaning is the story. And, and so, you know, obviously there's a resurrection on the other side of that, that he didn't, he didn't mention at the moment. But, but the breakdown is part of the thing. And, and so like I felt it was so interesting being, being a teenager in evangelicalism is because you constantly heard stuff like, you're the generation, you're the ones that are going to do this right. You know, like I pray that in your generation, you'll be able to spread the gospel to the four corners of the world. You know, like all this kind of like generational talk was really popular. I don't know if that still is going on in, in spaces, but, but man, like falling from that, it, you know, I felt like, like not to be too, I don't know, not to be too judgmental, but I felt like it was like the words of a lot of people with regrets when they were young, trying to keep us from making mistakes, you know, and just be like, you're the guys, you know, I just wish I had what you had with, you know, now, because like, if, you know, so, so that was the feeling. And so like, when, when I, when I stepped down for a while, I was like, you know, I had to like come to terms. I'm like, I'm just like, I'm not your guy right now. You know, like, but so, so, so yeah, there was the need for the church to kind of keep kids just like, don't fall down here. But that was not helpful because when the inevitable started to happen, there was, there was no space for me. But I mean, I found space. So there was, there was Rollins, and there were some Facebook group, kind of like this postmodern Christianity Facebook, or not Facebook. It was my space back then, postmodern Christianity, and like, just trying to explore these ideas with other people. It would have been really nice to be able to have, you know, and then so, so like the, the, the U shaped journey is inevitable. That's the story. That's the one everyone's gonna, gonna make. And I have some notes on this. Because, well, like, like with your talk so far with like, John Van Donk and Sam, and then even with, like talking with Verveki, like, what are we doing? It's like, Verveki had that dialogue-os thing, like we're, we're, you know, we're building something, we're, we're sense making, John Van Donk says. I think that's the upward journey. And we're taking for granted that everyone's already plummeted, thanks to postmodernism. But there's going to be people that are coming along that haven't taken the postmodern dump yet, or whatever new, new journey is going to infect the, the, the youth that are coming along and, you know, doe-eyed and coming out of, you know, just sort of a naive faith, and then hitting the real world. So, so part of it is like, how do you, how do you incorporate into the estuary, basically, like a, like a deconstruction phase, as well as a sense making phase? And I think they all kind of work together, because within a conversation, you can fall apart a little bit and then get built up a little bit, you know. And I think, you know, as Peugeot says, if this is the structure of reality, then this is what we're going to find meaningful in these conversations and stuff. I think that I'm going to, I'm going to reflect back a little bit on neo-evangelicalism and let's say 19th and 20th century domestic missiology. When I think about what the standard, the standard thing that churches would do, I think about D. James Kennedy's evangelism explosion. This was a very popular neo-evangelical evangelistic tool. It was, it was promoted at churches. It was taught, I got a class in it from Christian Reformed World Missions before I went off into the Dominican Republic. And thinking back out of now, I think that's really kind of, I don't know, I could talk a lot about that. But basically, when you think about what something like evangelism explosion was, it was an attempt to initiate the use, the U-shaped narrative. And so in that sense, it goes like this, you knock on someone's door and the imagination is that someone is just there at home minding their own business and they got little problems and things going on in their life. But you sort of, it's sort of, it's very industrial because you begin by imagining that the person you're about to talk to is a blank slate. Okay. Doesn't matter what happened before they opened that door, they're a blank slate. And you present them with this question. If you were to die tonight, what would you say to God to let you into his kingdom, let you into his heaven? Okay. And even if you just look at the story I've told so far, there are huge amounts of assumptions built all into that. Now it was a tremendously effective program or it wouldn't have been propagated and spread throughout kind of conservative and moderate, small orthodox churches all around the United States. There was the assumption that many of the people would have a basic framework that assumed the narrative you just instilled to them, that you could somehow sort of assume their life was a blank slate until you knocked on that door. But then it also assumed that, well, their goal was going to heaven. And then what you did with that question in a very crafty way was to trigger a little bit of existential angst and doubt that now you're building on an older implicit narrative, you know, pretty much the remnants of medieval Roman Catholicism and Protestant narratives where, well, the truth is that you're probably hell bound. And your narratives, well, I'm a good person. Well, there's been enough Christianity in the culture that that won't satisfy. It's interesting today because now we're building a new narrative that basically says your white flesh and your consumeristic environmental ways are destroying the earth and, you know, why are you polluting the world with your whiteness bigot? You know, why don't you just off yourself and end it all? Either that or the path to salvation is, of course, you know, own your privilege and use the magic words and on and on and on and on. So, you know, it's just interesting how we keep coming up with these little U-shaped structures as, and I think Peugeot was exactly right. Here's the story. Well, what is the story? Well, this is a story. It's, you know, in reform terms, it's creation, fall, redemption, restoration. It's a U. And so, where was I going with this? Now, all of those assumptions beneath that U changed, but that U was the dominant salvation narrative within waspy western, especially American Protestantism that, and this was the way in many ways that you could trigger someone to now begin to do a bunch of often very healthy things in their life because they would begin to get their house in order. They would begin to now suddenly this whole framework of Christian moral assumption came to bear on this person. You first told them that Jesus was going to save you, you know, by the virtue of his sacrifice. And now, well, that's where the narrative gets funny in terms of, well, is this something that are you now sort of earning your way to heaven or is this in gratitude, so on and so forth? So, you can see the U-shape structure, but what happens is that the, all of the assumptions that evangelism explosion assumed to be there have crumbled and gone. And you knock on the door and you say something like that, and there's still a percentage of the population out there that remains there, but many of them, that whole framework is so completely deconstructed that it simply has no purchase on them. So, now, I, so then what happened for, what happened often in Christian churches, you can see this, for example, in Jonathan Edwards, sinners in the hands of an angry God, you initiate an existential U-shape passage by first convincing them of the danger of hell. Once you've convinced them of the danger of hell, now you offer them the solution to the danger of hell. And, and this, you know, one might, someone might cynically say, well, that's just the path of modern advertising. And I would say modern advertising actually is a redux of this, is computing too hard? Apple is, are iPhones too expensive? Android, you know, it's, it's, it's problem solution, problem solution. Yeah, it's where they start black and white and the woman's like struggling with the, you know, she's just like fumbling with a banana split, like, why can't I make a banana split? And then, yeah. Here's the Popeo banana split maker, three easy steps. And, and so you're exactly right. You have this U-shape structure. Now, I have never, I have never found it terrifically efficacious to number one, assume a blank slate, which is why I like to begin with a conversation and actually hear where the person is at, because they've been living for decades before we meet. And they have a conceptualization and a framework of exactly what the story of their life is. And actually, if I want to talk to them, I should listen and, and then be able to use, you know, imagine myself sort of in the story and be able then to come into their world and, and become an effective conversation partner within their world. So that's one value. Another value is I, I, I, I both don't find it terribly, I don't find it terribly kind, nor terribly helpful to generally speaking, do the deconstruction for people, because it's gonna come. Yeah. And they ain't gonna like it. So my position is much more, I'm gonna wait until they're deconstructing, and then I'm going to talk to them. Because otherwise, there's a lot, there's enough people around me deconstructing at any given time that in fact, as a pastor, you know, the phone rings and someone's deconstructing on that they've jumped into their U shaped structure already. And it's, you know, I got plenty of use to deal with. In many ways. So I don't need to go, I don't need to go, you know, push people over the edge, just because I've got a basket underneath, and I'm going to instigate the slide for them. It's just easier for me to say, I'm gonna, I'm gonna look around and yeah, they're in it, they're in it, they're in it, you can see them, because they're, they're anxious, their, their life is, is kind of turned upside down. And at that point, I think, again, if you enter in, you I mean, if to the degree that I've had a, a liturgy in my meetups, it has always been, we're going to go around the room. And I want you to tell your story. Now, some people can manage to do that in three to five minutes every now and then you find someone who can't manage to do that at all, or under three or four hours. And then you have to kind of step in and help them do a little editing. And you know, it we're gonna, you know, for the sake of the group, we're going to keep this narrative moving. But, but if you actually begin with the people's stories, in the long run, you're going to be quite a bit more effective. Because otherwise, you know, you know what you really need, Jesse, you need the Popeel Banana Split maker. And I know your whole life up until now has been meaningless without this Banana Split maker. And somebody's gonna say, I don't even like banana splits. I don't eat ice cream. There's too many carbs. I only eat meat, you know, so so that's so in terms of the values I bring to this conversation, and the things that, that I haven't necessarily described what I do most of the time, because people are generally speaking, very interested in themselves. And if they're so so if there's something you can sort of begin to rely on, it's tell me about you, people are usually quite happy to tell if there's a situation of trust. I mean, if it's Hello, this is Apple, this is the Apple virus center, and we've detected it, you know, that isn't gonna go anywhere. So but and so that's in many ways, if you ask, Okay, what is estuary? Well, Paul Vanderklaas talked about it. Well, that's sort of, it's sort of grown out of the meetup. So what has Paul done with the meetups? It's all of these pastoral skills where have get the people talking, listen to them, care for them, love them. And to me, this is and that goes over to the I was at a church meeting last night, and, you know, someone sort of asked me, because evangelicalism has sort of taken this word evangelism in a certain way. And they've defined it as, well, initiate the use shape structure, get them to pray the sinner's prayer, which is sort of the, you know, the redemption movement there to get them out. And, and evangelicalism in a very modernist mechanistic sense, often will be like, I got five people to pray the sinner's prayer today, I brought five souls to Christ. And it's like, okay, but as a pastor, you recognize that, well, someone can go to the crusade, and someone can walk down the aisle, and you wind up meeting people who've done it five or six times, and you say, I don't know if we're all doing the thing that we say we're doing right here with this thing right now. Why don't we treat them as a living human being? Why don't we imagine that their life on earth are probably between birth and death? And why don't we, why don't we kind of do what Jesus says in terms of loving them? And actually, if you're coming from a Christian position, that Christianity is going to impact and mold your definition of love. And we're always recalibrating that as we go. But that, you know, the basic call, I mean, the good news, which is what, of course, the word evangelism is built on, is what is the good news? Well, the good news is the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Well, why is that good news? And when I hear a lot of people say, well, even if you can get me to for a minute by that Jesus walked out of that grave, what does that have to do with whatever's precipitating my usape structure today? So and that's actually the job of a pastor, is to help the person, help the person steward their story to understand, you know, all, you know, what is their story? Now, you can go like stories of old and say, well, there is no real story. And it's like, then why on earth are you doing a YouTube channel? It's just all pure entertainment? Or is in fact, does your life have purpose and a point and meaningful and, and I, you know, one of the beauties of Peter's story is that Peter's story is that the beauty of the beauties of Peterson was that Peterson saw early on that nihilism, people can't live that way, you might in your scientific brain say, well, that's the truth. That's like, all right, but you go, you go live that and people have been pointing that out for centuries. But, you know, modernism and sort of the scientific frame has been so dominant, that there's been enough internal reinforcement that like, yeah, we're totally meaningless. And I'm how meaningless it is like, Oh, okay. Sounds like a meaningful enterprise to me. But hey, you want to go for it? You go ahead. Yeah, yeah. One thing I'm kind of, you know, anticipating, like, I'm anticipating, like, what, you know, maybe not my pastor specifically, but I go to my pastor and I start this estuary. And then he's like, you know, you're bringing up a lot of stuff in there that's causing people to question their faith. You know, there's a lot of things happening in there, like, what's going on? Like, are we supposed to be bringing, you know, atheists and to hopefully, you know, bring them into the church eventually, you know, as some kind of, you know, evangelistic movement. So I'm just trying to figure out like, so, so that so there's always the part where we have, like, the church has to connect with what's going on in the secular world, like, science and whatever is going on with social justice. And we got to like, at least figure it out, engage with it, we rather than just, you know, ignore it and just close the gates, put up bigger walls, you know, because eventually that stuff will come get you. It'll undermine you or come over the top of the walls or, you know, it's better to engage it while it's, you know, it's the whole dragon story, you know, you know, interact with the dragon when it's tiny and get get a hold of it before it becomes this giant monster. And so, Ron Weiler and same with your sons. Right, right. Yeah. And so it's like, it's like, let's, let's engage with these ideas. And so they're so we got that side of it. And maybe we can reach out to people that don't that aren't Christians and that, you know, will hope, you know, maybe end up becoming Christian because of this. But there's also the other side, there's people inside the church that are going that need a space to think. And if, if there's no space to think, they leave. And so, you know, people are asking, like, why do kids go to college? And then, and then they leave the church is because, well, when they got space to think there was actually no space to actually reconcile their faith and, and all the stuff at college, you know, and, and so, like, can the estuary be, be this, this middle ground where you can allow people to, you know, obviously it is, but, but, but like, what do you say to the pastor when when all of a sudden, they're, they're, people are like, you know, like, I don't know that now they're talking about Jordan Peterson more than they're talking about, you know, the Bible, like, what am I supposed to, you know, I'm trying to, like, anticipate some of these problems that churches will have. And just, and, you know, one, one answer is, it's going to happen anyway. You might as well provide this space, you know, but this is like, it almost sounds like, you know, like, kids are going to go drink anyway, might as well have a drink at the church. Free booze at church. Church has never been fuller. We might as well give them the same space to, to get drunk and, yeah, I, I would say, I would say a couple of things. Okay. Let me tell you why pastors burn out. Pastors burn out because there is an implicit narrative in church work that says this, get people saved, get people to give their money and their time to church work. And the metric of success is butts and bucks and now eyeballs. That's the metric of success. And so what happens and, and, and what has happened in, in church work over the last 30, 40 years with the two income family, a whole bunch of things, the church has gotten, especially evangelical churches have gotten increasingly professional. So increasingly churches are not unlike other kinds of corporations out there. They have HR departments, they have multi-staff, I mean, on and on and on. So churches have all of these things and, and they have a mission statement. And this is, I mean, the seeker movement, basically, this was coming onto the church and the seeker movement base said, okay, well, we're gonna, we're gonna go to business school and, you know, Bill Hybels is gonna have his leadership conference and we're gonna read a whole bunch of business books. And I came back to North America at the tail end of this thing. And I came back to North America after being in first, that seminary, reading theology, and then in the mission field, having nothing to read, but doing all that, you know, missiological thing. And then I come back to North America and suddenly everybody's throwing business books at me. And that's basically your job is to grow the church. Okay. What does that mean? Well, that means, that means basically initiating people in their U-shaped journey and getting them to the bottom. And when they get to the bottom, well, okay, now you're in church, so we're gonna baptize you. And then, you know, just as you were, but now we're gonna make sure that you're different because now, you know, hunched, unchurched, Harry and Sally and, you know, on and on and on. And pastors, pastors have crises of the soul when they begin to realize that they're simply running a religious corporation and that what they're finally doing is using people. And whereas, you know, in all, that they have, they have really helped improve people's lives because when people usually, the ones who really bit in terms of their U-shaped structure were people that were already going downhill. And it was like, well, let's see, you cheated on your wife, you're drinking too much, you're, you know, all of these things that you're spending money poorly, all these things that churches would address. So you go to Saddleback, you have Celebrate Recovery, you have your, your money management program, you have your grief, you have all of these programs that address, you know, whatever this, whatever, whatever dropping they're doing right now. Here's the church at the bottom with a lot of wisdom saying, we're gonna, we're gonna teach you how to run your life better. And they do, and their lives improve and they tithe and they start going to church and they're very enthusiastic, loyal and devoted Christian people. And all of that is wonderful. But the pastor at the middle of it begins to say, well, there's always people who don't, who aren't quite fitting the narrative. And it's like, we don't really have time for those people. And they really kind of, you know, and there's all these little nice Christian-y sounding, these are, these are high grace people that we need a lot of grace for them. And once you get that label, it's like, right now I'm a problem. Because, you know, here's this, here's this Christian solution to all of my problems and it doesn't fit me. So even Jesus and his blood wasn't effective for my mess. And so pastors very quickly, pastors usually go into this profession with a heart that says, I want to help people. I want to love people. I want to care for people. And pretty quickly, they're running, they're running, you know, they're running Costco. If they're successful, if they're not successful, they're running a Ma and Pa store that's getting their lunch eaten by Costco. So, you know, and so the first thing you have to say and remind pastors is, what's your job again? Let's take the law and put it down into two ideas. Okay? And I don't need to do that for you if you've read your Bible and pastor, I hope you know your Bible to one degree. Jesus already did that and it's love God and love your neighbor. Okay. So why don't you start there? And so let's, let's begin clergy with an admonishment to love and not use people. Let's start there. And, and you see part of the reason that people have, part of the, not the whole reason, part of the reason people have gotten so, you know, so reactive about church. And this is very old. I mean, Gandhi made the Gandhi at his famous quote and people have seen it that, that once you institutionalize and you framework around this institution and you have a desired outcome, which even if it's an implicit one, which for Christianity is often, we want bigger buildings, we want more people, we want more attention. Once that's your business, you've lost something in Christianity. And all of these people that fall through the cracks. Well, there's always cracks and people always fall through them, but suddenly what happens is that, well, your program doesn't really work for all of these people. So, and, and so, okay. And I would, I would point to your story and say, number one, the pressures on the people in your church are there. And a certain, a certain number of your people are deconstructing the, the, the pressures and, you know, all of this mental stuff that people don't necessarily manage the symbolism of it, but they feel it and they respond to it. This, this drop in youth coming back to church, that the answer to this isn't do it louder. That's not the answer. And so, pastor, these are people that Christ has called you to love, start loving them. And well, that's, that's, you know, I'll be the first to admit that's a far more complex thing than, and when I say love them, I don't mean just be nice. Okay. Right. It'd be kind, but loving and nice are by no means the same thing. Okay. So you're going to have to work that out pastor. And, and, and the thing is, for the most part, pastors already having to do this anyway, unless they're so crass and so mercenary and so focused on some outcome that once someone is no longer useful to them, they simply drop them and no longer have time or attention for them. And, but there's plenty of stories of that. And it's like, okay, well, then you got some, they got some things in your soul. So I, I think churches should do this. And what do I mean by this? I mean, again, what, what do I mean by this? I mean, listen to people, pay attention to people to the degree that you have time and space in your life, try to love them or create structures of love, because that's, in my opinion, that's what the church is now, again, if you have a Christian framework, that love is going to have a certain shape. And, and that's often the grist of the conversation, but in any relationship, that's the grist of the conversation, even in a marriage relationship, because the charge usually of, you know, you haven't been loving me well. Well, that's probably true. But let's talk about the details of that, because if you loved me, you'd do this. Oh, okay. But now there's a lot built into that love question because, and I, and people play those games on me all the time, someone's sleeping in the parking lot or, you know, they're smoking a joint right outside, pastor, if you loved me, you'd let me keep doing smoking my crack pipe right outside your church. Oh, that's your definition of love. I see. I don't know that I agree with that definition of love. So we've got propositional truths to talk about, we got worldview tools to talk about, we've got worldview narratives to talk about, all that stuff is built in. But to the pastor, I'd say, what's at the core of your faith? What's at the core of your faith? evangelism. Okay, well, let's talk about what that means. Let's, let's go to the dude, who you call master, and listen to his words. Guess what, they're right there in your Bible. Guess what, let's go right to the core of it. Love God and love your neighbor as yourself. Let's start there. And, and see where we can go. Oh, you like first principles? There's our first principles, we're going to build from there. And anything in your church that, in some way isn't connected with that first principle, well, maybe that should be the purpose statement towards what your organization pursues. But it's really challenging. And I get that because there's all these trade offs that you make, because there's always someone that says you have failed to love me adequately. And that's probably true. And part of that is because none of us have enough time in any given day to actually love anyone adequately, nor do we even have a vision sufficient to have love to see what that would mean. So yeah, I understand how this is a tough sell. But I would, I would sit down and maybe I'll make an exception to my giving little pushes, because I'm not afraid to push pastors, because I will, I will say the pastor, are you running, are you running a religious service organization? Is your job to pump out material in order to create for yourself a marketplace and loyal followers? Are you basically doing what Apple does, except you do it with thought and not with plastic and, you know, plastic and aluminum electronics? Is that your business? Because if that's your business, when I look at Jesus, that didn't seem to be what he was doing. And if he is the prototype, if he is the master, if we are the disciples, then, you know, we look at him, and we follow him. And well, a lot of pastors want to, of course, sort of backtrack from there, because, well, look what, look where he wound up. You know, he's on a cross. And the pastors will say, well, you know, if I do this, my board will crucify me. Well, it says a lot about your board. But it also says something about you and Jesus. So if you're not willing to be crucified, his gig probably isn't for you. But if his gig isn't for you, stop using his name. So that's what I tell pastors. So maybe I'll make a clip of that you could share with your pastor. Well, I think a lot of people out there say, yeah, a pastor won't go for that. But I don't believe that. Because I know that there are cynical pastors out there. But you know, cynics like racists are as much made as born. And many, many pastors I know, when it comes right down to it, they got into this line of work because they want to help people and they want to make a difference and they want to make the world a better place. And they love Jesus. They really do. Because, and some pastors leave the ministry because they love Jesus. And they say, I can't do this job and keep my soul in the church. And they're not going to do it. And they're not going to do it. And they love Jesus. And they say, I can't do this job and keep my soul at the same time. And if you're in a situation like that, well, then the institution is to blame. And you should really work on the institution. So how do you do you see the estuary is possibly ameliorating some of that? Yes. So, I for me, what's, so what's the elevator pitch to put it in real business terms? I wouldn't say you put it in business terms. Let's put it in that frame again. Because that's been so helpful to us. I know, right. But, but I would just tell them, I would, I would tell them a number of things that you've heard me say on this channel many times. I as a small church pastor could go for months with having a meaningful substantive conversation with an unchurched person where they would actually come into my office and talk about their desires, their, they might not use the word sin, but their shortcomings, their longings, what they find meaningful, their aspirations. As a pastor, when someone starts opening up in those terms, it's like a big fat softball coming right over the plate. And it's like you as a pastor, now, now don't get all mercenary on them and say, well, what you need to do is join the church and get here every week. Well, if you do do that, and they do do it, and it doesn't work, now you're going to have a bigger problem. So let's, let's be a little, let's be a little bit humble about our program and spend a little bit of time listening and spend a lot of time loving and caring and bit by bit by bit, see what we can do. And again, you know, part of my value is saying to churches, because churches get very mercenary and pragmatic in this, well, the point of this program is to bring a lot of people in. And I'd say, no, the point of this program is to love people well. And I believe, because I'm a Christian minister, and I don't just go to this place because they pay me. I went to church long before anybody paid me to go to church. And quite frankly, go to church, going to church is often more fun when I'm not getting paid to do it, because I can just enjoy it then as a, as a, as a civilian. But, but to love people well, and, and I believe in the gospel, and I believe in Christianity, and I believe this is the shape of the universe, and I believe truth endures, and I believe water runs downhill. So I believe if you love people well in time, you're going to move them closer and closer and closer to Jesus Christ. Now, I'm also a Calvinist. And what does that mean? I believe I can't redeem people myself. There's a Savior. I believe the Holy Spirit changes hearts, not me. So I'm going to do whatever I can to build an altar on Carmel and say, Lord, bring the fire. You bring the fire, but I'm going to build the altar. I'm going to love them. I'm going to, I'm going to do what I can. And of course, I don't have enough time. I used to have more, even before I had a YouTube channel, I didn't have enough time to love everyone well. That's just the way it is with human beings. Human beings are, are bottomless pits of receiving love. Many, some people are very wide bottomless. You can pour love down there all day long, and you won't make a dent. Trust me, I know. Yeah. But, but the point of the Christian life is to be, to pour yourself out. Just, you know, that's, that's at the heart of this gospel, that the God man comes and sacrifices himself for that bottomless empty pit of the world and fills it. That's the good news. That's the gospel. And now I'm not the son of man. I'm not Jesus Christ. I'm just one little person. So I'm going to pour and pour and pour. And then when I'm poured out, I, I see my father and I hear his judgment on me. That's, that's the story. Okay. So that's, that's, and so I say as a pastor once, you know, and, and of course, this is why I don't say here's the program for estuary, because I, I happened upon it. I made a commentary video about Jordan Peterson. And suddenly lots of people wanted to talk to me. I'm the same person I was before I made that video. I, you know, I just, via YouTube, people saw a little different thing. We initiated a conversation. It's gone someplace. So, okay. I keep following. You follow that lamb wherever he goes. And, and so I keep following it, but, but what, what do I keep trying to do? I keep trying to love people. And, and it's, and actually I don't recommend starting a YouTube channel and getting a bunch of followers and having more people know you if you want to love people, because it's really hard because you, you begin to realize that you don't have anywhere near enough of you to love everyone. But again, as a Christian, I say, okay, Lord, I can't love all these people. You are God. I am not bringing other people into their life to love them. And, and maybe to whatever extent I, I can facilitate the creation of structures where people will be loved better than they are loved now. I think that is the work of the church and, and churches all the time. You know, they, they got a clothes pantry or they're giving away hot dogs or they're, they're fixing up some neighborhood community center. They're doing something and for the common good. Great. That's love. Okay. Now, but this is part of the, I think churches have been stupid in this because it's like, well, we want people to come into our church and believe Jesus and then give and volunteer and, and, and make our tribe bigger. Okay, great. Well, guess what? You know what happens in that process? Stuff between their ears. And, and it's not a matter of, well, here, say these words and be in our worship service. And it's amazing that works at all. And it does to a degree, but there's a lot of people and, and as society gets increasingly complex, as the internet is here, as we're all flooded with all of these ideas. Well, you're going to have to, you're going to have to walk people through these ideas and you're going to have to do it patiently, gently, honestly. And when you don't know something, you say, you don't know. And, and so that's all we're doing. We're walking people through the ideas that are around and helping them sort things out, helping them clean their room. And, and in the long, I believe in the long run, this in fact is kingdom work and God's, I think this is the work of the Lord. And again, when you look at Jesus, this is what's so amazing. You know, you get this one place where he starts saying, follow me. And not everybody goes, you know, I've got to, you know, people have these excuses. And so right away churches should be ready for that, that, Hey, come join my church. Your music sucks and the pastor's boring and you've got obnoxious people there. Oh, okay. So you're not coming, I guess. Fine. But, but once, especially in this culture, consumerist culture, once people figure out that, well, this church game is you want my money and you want my time and you want it, you want to turn me into a minion. And here's the thing in the kingdom of God, there aren't minions. There are members and every member matters. I mean, read CS Lewis's essay on membership. I mean, he makes that so clear and nobody in church wants to be a minion. They want to be loved. They don't want to be part of a body. They want to be valued. Apostle Paul writes about this, you know, and to me, I, you know, and again, I say estuary is outside the walled garden. And I do that intentionally because I believe there are, there are reasons for the structure of the walled garden. So let's keep that as it is, but churches that don't release the water to bless the estuary, they build a reservoir and it's going to silt up and it's going to, you're going to have, you know, invasive species in it. You got to keep the flow going. And so to me, it's not an elevator pitch. I'm really bad at that, but to me, it's better. To me, this is, this is the work of the church. The work of the church is to bless the world. And it's always been that way. And that's how the church conquered the Roman empire. I mean, the emperor's complaining, ah, these Christians, they don't even just feed their poor people. They feed pagan poor people. How dare they? And Jesus, you know, this gets me going because I, and again, I'm not cynical about the church. I walk into all sorts of churches and I watch these churches, you know, giving away money to strangers and blessing a town and, and working to end sex traffic and, and, and, and we got YWAM. I mean, YWAM does this in amazing ways. And I see Christian people doing this and I say, why don't we also do this with words and not just hot dogs and candy? Why don't we do this with ideas? Let's be, let's be confident enough in the gospel and in the content of Christianity that we can enter into conversations often now with our children and say, let's talk about these things. I'm not going to play games. I'm not going to pressure you. I'm not going to try all these little tricks to try to get you to conform. I'm going to treat you with respect. I'm going to treat you as an adult. We're going to talk. That's what we're going to do. And as a Christian minister, I am confident that if I believe, if I believe why everything that my tradition says is true, well, then why am I going to be so anxious to manipulate people and coerce them and try to control them? That's, that's a betrayal, not only of the command to love, but even of what I say, I believe from my tradition. So to me, this is, this is an obvious thing to do. Yeah, man, this is, this is all kind of downstream for modernism because evangelicalism got into the pickle of thinking that knowledge of God was what saved you instead of Christ. And so, and so, instead of the man himself, that's right. Right. Right. And so your belief was the thing that saved you. Like your, your knowledge of these facts, you know, that they took believe in your that they took believe in your heart, you know, you know, confess with your mouth, believe in your heart. They took that as a epistemology statement, which it is, but, but it's, but it's also on other levels too. And so as far as like, well, well, we built the dam up to stop. Yeah, there was a dam built up because we had to protect that knowledge or we had to, we had to protect it from getting infested with the salt water. And so, you know, you saw this, that's exactly what the creationists did. They just basically said, no, it foundationally evolution is wrong. And we're going to come up with a different materialistic solution to Genesis. That's right. And, and instead of actually, because if they actually engaged with the ideas in evolution, then maybe we could have had someone like Jordan Peterson sooner that actually like, Oh, religion emerges from evolution. Now what are you going to do? You know, that whole thing that, that kind of broke that, you know, these ideas, but so, but I still kind of feel like at least I, you know, I haven't asked, asked the people in my church directly about this and maybe that's what I'm going to do next, but there's still this idea in evangelicalism that you got to protect that, that belief from getting, you know, infected by the world. And so, you know, you engage in apologetics and all these sort of defensive measures to stop, you know, when you get into a conversation, you're only supposed to get into conversations that you kind of have a roadmap for, you know, that, you know, that's the, but that's such a, no, no, I don't believe you're saying that, but I know you're exactly right. But that's what people think that's because, because they're trying to protect this belief because the belief saves me. Right. That's such a, that's such a position of fear and fragility. Dare I use the word? Well, the thing is, is like, so we would have exactly right because they have to maintain this psychological state because if they lose that psychological state, because that's what saves them is that psychological state. Now I hate to play this card, but there's in a sense, part of the Calvinist Armenian conversation, because part of what the Calvinist said is that state doesn't save you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's Jesus that saves you, not that state. Yep. Because you're exactly right. Cause once that state saves you, well now, you're in all kinds of trouble. You're in all kinds of trouble. And, and at least the Calvinist position, which I believe is the historic position of the church you'll find, and I don't want to get too far down that road, but the idea is that finally and fundamentally, the thesis statement of the book of Jonah, salvation belongs to the Lord. Mm hmm. Finally, it is, it is, I am saved by Christ through faith. I have, this is not a work by myself, lest any man should boast. Gosh, I wish someone had written that down maybe 2000 years ago. Who would know? But this is, this is the idea. Now the question then that, that comes up, which is that the Armenian, well, what about agency? And I think there's a reason that the Calvinist Armenian feud happened at a particular point in the, in the philosophical development of Europe and deism, but you know, that's all for other videos, but, but, but you're exactly right. Once, once this psychological state is the thing that saves you, now suddenly you have to build up a wall and this is, this is what we have to preserve. So don't let that, don't let the kids lose that. But the thing is, just as you demonstrated in your own, you can't look at someone and say, they got that going. So you read the signs in their life and say, well, are they still going to church every week? But the thing is, well, you can go to church every week and you, if you're, if you're, if you're a fairly, if you're a fairly conscientious person and you've got enough familial pressure, you'll maintain that. But what's been happening in the church over the last 7,500 years is all of those pressure mechanisms that small, often ethnic communities like the Christian Reformed Church could reliably maintain, that's been broken down. And so, and, and in fact, denominations like my own, they took down the walls after World War II and they tried to put up new walls. Now we're going to put it around the evangelicals, now the Bible believing churches. So, but, but yeah, you're right. I mean, the goal was to keep this, keep this thing going. And because if you lose this thing, oh, now we're lost. And, but again, back to my tradition, this doesn't save you. Right. Well, I, like, I think people, like, if I talk to them about it, they're like, oh yeah, I know that, but they act like it does. And so you're stuck in this, because like, so, you know, this is, you know, 20 years ago when this happened, but I can't imagine that it's so foreign today, but you would, you would get training from some sort of evangelist expert would come in and talk to you and teach you how to do, like, street evangelism or whatever. And the idea was, is that you would have enough audibles that you could get, push it to your end goal. You always knew the end goal. And then you knew how to do these paths. So if they brought up this, you could do that. And, and they were always like very extroverted, very, very charismatic. They had, you know, just like, yeah, some of these guys were not good looking, but then they'd also have this like database of just like memorized arguments. And, you know, this is where, like why I mentioned apologetics is because they would, they would have the, all the lines of the apologetics, you know, like they'll quote CS Lewis and all this stuff to, to be able to steer this toward their end goal. And this is not what's happening in the estuary. The estuary is, you know, I, or Vervecky talks about it really good. He talked, when he talks about dialogos, we're engaged in a process where something's going to happen. And we, and we basically trust the process. And, and, you know, as a Christian, I know that, you know, this is Christ that is enabling this process to happen, you know, whether you're coming down or going up or sense making or deconstruction, you know, Christ is running the whole hierarchy. But so the space is actually a space to think. I like, I had the, because Sam brought up the group, Don't Mom Alone. I was like, well, what, maybe this is like, Don't Think Alone. So, so, so like, it's, it's, it's basically a space to engage in this process. But, but that's entirely different than this evangelical kind of maze that you're trying to run everything towards a known endpoint. And, and yeah, I just wonder what you think about that. Oh, I think that's right. And the evangelical known endpoint is not what everyone imagines it to be. Now, everyone has a known endpoint. You can't, you can't navigate with one implicit, at least in your mind. But over time and through cultures, and this gets into the culture, mission, missiological thing too. We're not going to see another St. Augustine, because we don't have someone living in hippo at the beginning of the fifth century again. And, and when we become like Christ, it doesn't mean we're not like a 21st century North American. I love, you know, this has been really helpful, because I think, you know, you've helped me see a bunch of things in evangelicalism. It's terrible. No, that's right. And it isn't because, and this is something that, because gosh, I have met, I have met, oh, there are horrible people in churches. Yeah, but there are some gems there too. And there's some gems outside the church. I met real gems outside the church. But I, you know, for in terms of, I believe, I believe in the power of church to help people live transformed lives. I, you know, I am, I am by no means a skeptic of the church. In fact, I'm, I'm probably, people will, people will complain about my optimism for too many different kinds of churches to make improvements in people's lives. Because then we play these little tribal games with our tiny little denominations and things. But I know I just go and go to go back to where you're at. I think you formulated it well. And, and, and you're right that, I mean, if the goal, and again, now we have these, we have these little other goals that have crept into Christianity and the church in our context, the goal is to keep the thing going. You know, the goal is to, okay, well, what is this thing? Well, this is, well, we can't, since we can't look in their heads, there's, are you, are you doing your daily quiet time? Yes. Are you attending church regularly? Yes. Do you have a small group? Yes. Are you committing adultery? No. Are you tithing into the church? Yes. And so we have all this little checklist. And, but then something happens and, whoa, you know, we got to get back to this. And, and so then, and so then what churches become are these, I had one good friend of mine once say, well, the, the, the, the job of the church is to deploy an experience to basically didn't use these words, but to basically deploy a, a, a, a reproducible experience. And it is just exactly this. So we're going to have the praise at worship and that's going to, you know, that's the music's going to be great. And so I'm going to get into that. I'm going to get into that space where I'm loving Jesus and I'm believing everything, feeling it and the music is there. And we've got thousands of people with me and, and, and, hey, I love that space much as everybody. And I'm feeling down, boy, I put on the music and I get into that space. And it's like, I love that space, but this space does not save me. Right. And, and the reason I know that is because what happens when I lose my marbles, when I get to be 80 years old and dementia kicks in and I can't remember where I put my keys and I can't generate the space anymore. Well, now I've lost my salvation. No. Right. And, and, and we know this, we know this. So let's stop playing this game. So, so can the S2, all right. So we, for the people that have this going on, I will, the, the estuary is going to be a deconstructive experience for them because they're going to try to maintain this. Yes. And, and that's why, that's why, and, and in a lot of ways, you know, if this is working for people, I'm not going to bother them. Yeah. Let them be whatever. I'm not going to bother them. I mean, they're, they're, they're, they're, they're following the Lord. They're faithful to the church. They're, they've got joy in their faith. I'm not going to bother them. But I see a whole, I see everybody else walking out saying, I can't do this anymore. I, it starts to get a little wobbly and you're like, it's off balance. And like, I need to balance this up. I can't balance it out. I'm like, no, you got to let it go. Or, or they just get lost in this all the time. And it's like a drug. And I don't, you know, they, they don't, they don't do anything else in terms of their faith. And they're a horrible human being, but they're sure doing this. And it's like, man, now you're, I won't use other words for that, but, you know, and, and so the Christian life is, yeah, there's this in the Christian life. Absolutely. It's wonderful, but we all go down the hole sometime and, and you can't, and I love how your story, your story in many ways relates this so much because, you know, while I, I, where's, I should pull that book. It was by Jim Schop is a retired professor of English at Dork College in Iowa. And he wrote a tiny little biography of Mother Teresa. It's just a little book. And he asked me that's, I'm, I'm, I'm only, I've only done blurbs for two or three books in the world. So this is one of the few books I've done a blurb for. And the core of his biography of Mother Teresa is that she didn't have any of this. She thought God had abandoned her. She thought, I mean, you know, if she had gone to a good psychologist, he would say, well, we're going to get you on some drugs because you're depressed. You're depressed. And so what does she do when she's depressed? She goes to one of the poorest places in the world and helps the bottom rung of people. And I probably deeply psychologically, somewhere that made her feel better. Cause she's like, if I think I have it bad, look at this schmo, you know, his family's abandoned them and he's dying on the street. And the best we can hope for is to put them under someplace and give them food and water until he expires. Right. You gotta be pretty low to have that be the only thing lower. And that makes you feel good. But she didn't have any of this. And yet she was faithful and endured and, you know, and, and say, Hey, so the Christian life isn't this. When you got this, praise God for it. Just like money, you know, when you got money, be thankful to God for it and be generous with your money. That's the point because love is what's at the center here. Love is what's at the center here. And so, no, I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna bother people who, who are, who are, who are not falling into the pit, you know? And I think Jesus, it's the sick who need the doctor. And so what does Jesus go, who does Jesus talk to? In some ways, he leaves the people alone who are, you know, okay, they're happy in their little program against Rome, they're off in the desert in some hole. Bless you. But, but Jesus looks around and says, no, it's the people who are the people have fallen in the hole. I'm going to go to them. And the truth is, again, as a pastor, it's actually quite efficient use of time, because, you know, you know, tell, talk all these other people out of it. Now, you're not, you're not, you're not. But it comes, the story, as Peugeot said, the story comes to everyone. So, you know, we've already got more people than we can handle right now. So wait till the story comes to them, and then step in and love them. And that to me, if there's an estuary space, do that. And someone said, well, isn't that what you're supposed to do in the church? Yeah, do it there too. But you don't have to fuss. And here's the thing, again, that the doctrines, the beliefs, the practices, all of that stuff has been, has been the accomplishment and the achievement of years of tradition. Not my job to knock that down. Okay. Here, we're outside the space. All right. Because you're supposed to love people everywhere you're at, not just in the church. So step out of the church and love the people here too. Yeah, that's really good. I'm coming to mind is the story of the rich young ruler. When he, when he comes to, to Jesus, and he says, I've done all these things, you know, what do I still lack? And Jesus says, well, sell everything you have, and then come give it to the poor and come follow me. And, and that, that is a successful Christian deconstruction. Because he basically said, like, if you have, if you, I mean, if you have a few million dollars, you have this, you have the, you know, I imagine he was coming to Jesus, and he's like, let me be your patron, let me be someone that can support your ministry, I believe in what you're doing. All my resources are yours. And he basically says, No, what you have to do is you have to give it all to the poor. So the power that this wealth enabled him, when you give it to the poor, it disappears. You get you give a, you know, a million dollars, $1,000 to 1000 people, and a million dollars is just gone. And no one is better off. You know, they got $1,000 extra that month or whatever. And then six months, they're in the same spot they were. And so his wealth, the power of his wealth is gone. Then then Jesus says, just come follow me. He's not even going to be a disciple. He's going to be one of the crowd that follows Christ around the countryside and listen to his teaching. He's basically saying, you know, this is my game. I am playing this game. And if you're wondering about eternal life, learn to play this game. Because that's what I'm doing. I'm dying and I'm going to rise again. And so just as much as like deconstruction is inevitable, I'm trying to formulate how resurrection is inevitable, because it's inevitable somehow. Because that's like what CS Lewis talks about in like the in when when Aslan knew the deeper magic, that there's a deeper magic afoot that the witch didn't know about. And then that's how he was able and it always kind of rubbed me the wrong way. This is CS Lewis did that. I was like, I was like, oh, he just wrote in deep magic into the but I think he was cheated every now like the end of the great divorce. He wakes up he was dreaming. It's like, Oh, Lewis, Tolkien and the England say, No, no, no dreams, no dreams. But I can appreciate Lewis's idea that there's there's something inevitable about resurrection, like, if you go down, you'll come back up. And and so just like, and so there's something where if you're trying to keep this afloat, you're not believing in that what goes down comes up, and comes up more glorious. Exactly. You're believing that if I just maintain until Jesus comes and pulls me up, you know, or whatever the story is, you have to engage this, this process. And so yeah, so, so I see a lot of people in the discord and estuary type spaces that are at the bottom. But as this moves to churches, I imagine we're going to have people up here that got this going on, or some form of this that are needing to I don't even, you know, engage with the resurrection somehow. Yeah, yeah. And the only way to do it is to come down somehow. So yeah, I mean, I think that's an interesting possibility. And I think that that if I, you know, you can find spaces on like that online, I think there's plenty, there's plenty of spaces online where you could find that but it's, you there's barely any information. Yeah, because it's really messy. Yeah. And what's terrifying to us when they see someone, and this is part of the reason churches really try to keep this and, and, you know, and then exile people who drop down the hole. Yeah, is because it's terrifying for us because we look at someone and we think that could happen to me and I don't want to be at the bottom. That could happen to me and I don't want to be at the bottom. And I got to protect my thing. That's right. I want to stay here. Please let me stay here. And I think that's built into the Lord's Prayer. Keep us from temptation. Keep us from because this is the time of testing. Yeah. And right in the Lord's Prayer, we're given free sanction. You know, go ahead and pray to God to be, to stay, to stay in your happy place. That's a, that's an absolutely legitimate prayer. There's nothing wrong with that prayer. But what did Jesus do? He comes down to earth. He goes down all the way to the day of the Lord, all the way to the bottom. Yeah. And the, the, the grand miracle that see it, you can find it in C.S. Lewis Doodle. You can find it in his book, Miracles. I mean, he goes down all the way and nothing can be raised that has not first died. And so that is in fact, you know, it's the hero's journey. The, the model myth is sort of a, a version of it and it's deeply meaningful. And, and the truth is in the age of decay, we, we, we, we, we're all going to go down, you know, and, and part of my, so yesterday, a friend of mine, I got news yesterday that a friend of mine died. He was a little younger than I am. He was a, he worked for Habitat in the Dominican Republic with me. He was an artist. He, you know, we had a little cohort in the D.R. of expats who lived in this tiny little town and boy, in a context like that, you become very close because, you know, we all have, you know, and, and, and so, you know, he died and sudden heart attack. I don't know exactly why, but I think similar to my sister who died a couple of years ago that way. We live in this culture where we have designed this culture so that we keep perpetuating the idea that the day of the Lord, the apocalypse, it won't come to us. If we have enough money, if we have insurance, if we have medical technology, if we have a good government, if we have good friends, one way or another, we can protect ourselves from the age of decay. It is a lie. It is a lie. It comes to all of us. It, it will. You will, you will, you will, people will betray you, you will lose your money, you will lose your sanity, you will lose your job, you know, and, and in the end, you will lose your life and the things that you built will fall apart. And this has, this has been true of, of human beings for as long as we've known them. And okay, what are you going to do? And, and to me, the resurrection is the answer to that. But it's a, it's, it doesn't come, here's the irony, because what we want is, well, that's resurrection thing. I think someone has to go through it first. Okay. So let's imagine you believe he did. Well, do you really believe that? Really believing is this kind of a tough thing too. Well, that's the thing. And, and, and, but, but that, that well space is also meaningful, because it's an, it's an aspirational faith. It's something that, you know, do I, do I really believe? Am I confident? And, and, and I think it's in this space that we, that we walk with people when they deconstruct or when they go hot down how many different kinds of holes and, and they hit bottom. And we're in terror because sometimes we see people that we really respect it and we think, gosh, if they can lose this, what hope do I have? Well, and I think this is where we say, no, first of all, you're not saved by this. You're saved by Christ. So trust in him. Don't trust in this feeling. Secondly, again, look to Christ because he does, he starts higher, goes lower, ends up higher than we possibly can. So if his journey is like this, ours might be like this, but because he's done it already, we can have confidence and hope. So, and, and to me, again, this is, this is the gospel. This is the Christian life. And it is, it is, it is, it is, we, we see it validated that now, again, it's terrifying because we look around and we say, yeah, but I, I saw this person lose this and then they lost their marriage and they lost their job and they lost their sanity and then they took their life. Yeah. Okay. Well, that's true. Well, what, what about it? What's on the other end of that? Well, God knows, God knows what is, and we know his character. So we trust him that in the end, you know, the right thing will be done. And I trust him with that because what's the point of deciding you don't trust him with that? Oh, now you're anxious about this too. Well, you didn't have enough anxieties in the rest of your life. You're going to worry about someone else's problem. Come on, be a little wise. So this is, to me, this is the Christian life. And well, how can you know that it's all going to turn out well? This is where I'm going to trust. And I'm going to take it on the resurrection. That's right. And, and, and we've been, you know, and in terms of, you know, I'm not a huge fan of a lot of apologetics, even though I sort of probably do my own kind, but in terms of the resurrection, you know, Paul, I'll just go back to first Corinthians 15, Paul's argument is compelling. And again, it's a very old argument. I mean, I don't, I don't like setting up the gospels against Paul, because in many ways, Paul is sort of, the gospels are actually after Paul, but Paul is sort of a prototype of this. And, and he had to work this stuff through himself. And so what we have in his letters in the New Testament are him working through this stuff and sharing it with other Christians, as they're working through this stuff. Yeah. And, and that has proven itself to be a reliable God guide for the formation of the church. And so, you know, that's, that's what we it's, it's the inspired word of God. That's what we call it. That's the language we use to describe how that is and what that does for us. So, well, we've gone at this for quite a while, but it's been good. Any, any other things you want to touch in before we hit the two hour mark? Let's see. Let me just look over this stuff to see if there was. How, how do you think, like, and I know that you, your group started just by Jordan Peterson, but say, you try to start a Jordan Peterson group, no one's interested. Like, what, what do you, so do you start just a group about, like, how do you go about finding, what, how, what's the topic you engage people with? Yeah. What's, what's the, that's, that's a real good question. And something that I'm wrestling with, because, you know, truth be told, you know, when part of why not, but only part, because I, I too had the same, I saw Peterson put two worlds together. I said, Ooh, that's, that's really important the way he's doing that. And then I watched what was downstream, and I saw the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the dream of him. I said, Ooh, that's really important. But what I did with the meet up was basically just pastoral instinct where just like I told you, I got people in the room, I asked them about, and we're going to, we're just going to, it's basically, I just started a small group and I use Jordan Peterson as this, you know, he was, he was giving out pheromones for people who wanted to think out loud together. And then they came and we don't necessarily have him right If we see a second wave of Jordan Peterson, maybe we will. And so whereas before I could say, just go on to meetup.com, say Jordan Peterson meetup, and you'll probably get some people to come and start the conversation. I would say at this point, you're probably going to have to figure out how to start the conversation. And that's gonna take some skill. But I think that the practice of it is the same in terms of, well, it's not different from the practice. Being a polite person, you welcome them into the space, you ask them about themselves, you ask them why they came, what they're looking for, and you begin the conversation. And in our local meetup, part of the reason that, I have my say in terms of the direction of the local meetup, but we work on it collaboratively and together. And I always listen to them because very quickly, the natural things just happen. We sort of had a core group of those who were most interested in it, most committed, and that core group really, people who came in meetings one through three for the most part, and they've stuck with it. And we don't talk about Jordan Peterson that often because he hasn't produced things. So then- He was the initial spark. So how do you find an initial spark? Can you start a meetup group around discussing LGBT issues? Like is that a place you could start with an estuary? Like if there was enough people in your community that that was like a place they wanted to talk about. But I feel like that's too narrow. And then it's too, but maybe you could get enough people to talk about it. You could, you're gonna have to be pretty skillful though with something like that because- Yeah, because then you're dealing with like, I don't have the expertise to like manage, you know, I'm a white straight dude. You could start it around a whole variety of things if you are careful not to let, not to have the group get colonized with certain political or ideological agendas. And that was- So I thought- Conspiracy theories or- Well, all kinds of, almost anything can do it. But, and that was one of the things that Peterson, I thought, lent himself well to it was that there was enough, there was enough stuff there that people did wanna talk about all of sort of the usual suspects that you'd get in a Jordan Peterson meetup. But Peterson had a far broader body of material out there so that you could pick up on some of the other elements and really bring them in. And so, and just in terms of my own leadership, one of the things early on, not that you couldn't name Donald Trump, but this wasn't gonna become, you know, you know, a Republican, this, we're not gonna be an activist group for anything. Yeah, yeah. That's part of the issue. We're not gonna become an activist group for anything. We're gonna have open, honest conversation and everybody's gonna have their politics, everybody's gonna have their take on sexuality, everybody's gonna have their religious take just because people have ideas about those things. So we're not gonna be allergic to those when someone comes up and says, I think Donald Trump is blank for whatever side they were, we're not gonna run out of the room screaming or pick up baseball bats and bludgeon them. We're not gonna do that. We're not gonna be afraid of their ideas, okay? We're gonna listen to them. Okay, they've got an idea, good. We're gonna still gonna listen to them and we're gonna respect them and we're gonna have honest conversation. And we're going to, this is a sign of the structure, we're gonna develop a culture where, okay, you think Trump is wonderful, you think Trump is the devil. The whole meeting isn't gonna be about this. We're gonna back you two off and say, okay, you think he's the devil, you think he's wonderful, congratulations. We'll give you a little badge. So we all know this. We're not gonna let Trump dominate the room and we're not gonna let LGBT issues dominate the room. We're not gonna let racism dominate the room. And I'm a pastor, we're not even gonna let church stuff dominate the room. We're gonna talk and what's on the mind of the people, we're gonna do some processing together. And a lot of people can do this if you've got those skills and many people have those skills. And again, churches really do have these skills because people who have worked in church small groups and been successful in working on small groups, it's the same thing. I mean, someone's like, I believe in end times ministry. It's like, all right, he believes in end times ministry. And we know whenever we get anywhere near end times ministry, we're gonna hear it out of this guy. Just take it for granted. Don't let that fluster you and keep moving. And keep it going. And say, okay, you believe in end times ministry. Well, what about this other thing? What do you think about that? Well, I don't know about that. Okay, good. Well, let's talk about that. And so we... So keep it exploratory, keep it dialogues, not monologues. Keep asking people to share. And then encourage respect when someone has shared something vulnerable. Don't jump in too fast to fix things. But there was stuff when I first joined the discord, like how long people would pause before responding that I noticed. Like right away I was like, oh, people are taking a lot longer to respond because they're thinking about stuff. And if someone jumped in and said something real quick, sometimes they would get ignored for the moment. And then the thoughtful response would come and then maybe they come back. There's like this sort of slower Tai Chi moves going on on the discord that I noticed like right away that I really appreciated. I was like, oh, no one's trying to like, just sort of butt in with their, whatever they have to say at the moment. Yeah, that's where like the caught more than taught. So it's like maybe a slower multiplication process, but it'll have better downstream effects. Right, right. And you build relationships with one another. And with our local meetup, I mean, they've emphasized doing some things together, so especially a group of guys, we have projects that we do together. If there's someone, some old lady who can't, clean up her backyard, maybe we'll go up and out and do something like that. So, the church has a lot of deferred maintenance around here and so things like that. So, I mean, our meetup group basically, the sanctuary floor got worse and worse and worse. It needed to be stripped and waxed. And in past years, when the church was younger, the church would do that about every six months or a year, because you have to move all the chairs, you have to get the buffer, you have to do that. And church hadn't done it for seven or eight years and the floors were a mess. And it was just kind of eaten at people. And so the meetup group came in and we stripped and waxed the floor. We didn't know what we were doing. So, we had to learn as we went, but we had, and you become friends, you have fun together, it's life on life. And again, in terms of our meetup group, there's only one of us, besides me, or besides my son too, one new person is in church every week and came because of that. Most of them aren't, but that's okay. And I don't put pressure on people because again, I think part of that, especially with millennials, with the younger generation, older generation, it's like, if you're not putting pressure on me, you don't really love me. Okay, you want pressure? I'll give you pressure. Pressure is easy. But let people work their process and try to be helpful. And that's the culture of it. And if someone runs in too quickly and they sort of become a non-player character, well now they've become a non-player character and everybody kind of knows they're a non-player character and you lose status being a non-player character. Whereas often in church, you gain status being a non-player character. And so, and that's where in many ways, the culture is very much of the internet and of this stuff. But at the heart of it is love. At the heart of it is love. And it's in that way that it's deeply Christian. And it's that way that any pastor who comes to me and says, boy, you're spending a lot of time with these people and you're really not getting them baptized. And they say, okay, okay, fair enough, fair enough. And maybe I'm really bad at it. So go and do better than me, please. I'd love that. Do better than me. I'd love you to. If you have a better idea, you go and do it. But I'm gonna keep doing what I'm doing here because I have reasons to believe in it. Maybe I'm wrong. And if I'm wrong, I'm wrong. But that's human. It was really good, Paul. Man, that was awesome. Oh, good, good. Well, I'll post it tomorrow. And I think this will be helpful for people too. So, it's really good, Jess. Thanks, thanks so much. Thanks for sharing your story again. And it's- It was a privilege. It's wonderful. So yeah, enjoy your whatever's left of your- I gotta go back to work. Yeah, me too, me too. All right. Take care, Jess. Bye. Bye-bye.