https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=PfEYdG6mTQg

 Hi, this is Paul. And my last video, at least in this train of thought, how the civil rights great awakening created the religion that denies it's a religion, I did a lot of referencing to George Marsden's book. Let's see if I can. Fundamentalism in American Culture. You see the title modernism, schools, church, denial of the Bible, Darwinism, and basically pulling down the pillars of American culture. This book was first written and released in the 1980s. It was updated recently. The blurb at the top, one of the most significant works of cultural history in the past 25 years, Benjamin Swartz Atlantic Monthly. I think it is an incredibly important book, and the book's been around a while. It's been hailed by many over the years. It might not be a book that many of you have read, but in fact, I hadn't read it until now. I had heard about it. I'd heard about it often. It was the book often associated with George Marsden's work. And I've read other books of Marsden's, but this book really gets at a bunch of cultural history that's really important for the questions that we're raising with respect to, how did this new religion arise, a religion that's in a degree of denial that it is a religion after all? Recently, I see on Twitter people, modern progressive Christians, throwing up the alarm about Christian nationalism. And every time I hear that, I think, oh, Christian nationalism is sweeping away America, and it needs to be stopped. And I think, we're not anywhere near the levels of Christian nationalism that the country has been historically. In fact, it's probably at the lowest levels it's ever been. What's interesting about this book, and I think why the whole Jordan Peterson episode, which again, continues to, you know, now with the article in The Times, in the UK, just gets stranger and stranger, because in some ways, Jordan Peterson, as a modernist who believes in Darwinianism that the other leg, not denial of the Bible, but somehow turning people onto the Bible, wants to, in a sense, save Christian civilization. And so, as is almost always the case, things just keep taking stranger turns. Now, I wanted to jump into the first chapter, Evangelical America at the Brink of Crisis. Now, for those who, when you hear evangelical, it's sort of become a term that has been wholly colonized by the news media. Technically speaking, the wave that happens in the middle of the 20th century, spearheaded by the likes of Billy Graham and Christianity today, was called neo-evangelicalism, because this word evangelical goes all the way back, well, obviously, to the Bible, but really got refreshed by the Protestant Reformation. And as you can see by Marsden's use of it in the American society just after the Civil War, you can begin to get some of the resonance of this. In 1870, remember that the Civil War ends in 1865, the American Civil War, in 1870, almost all American Protestants thought of America as a Christian nation, okay? So again, this Christian nationalism, this panic from one side that because you see demonstrations that were hailing Donald Trump and had all kinds of Christian symbolism with a mob, part of whom stormed the Capitol, et cetera, et cetera, people losing their stuff over this, this is nothing new, okay? In 1870, almost all American Protestants thought America was a Christian nation, although many Roman Catholics, sectarians, skeptics, and non-Christians had other views of the matter. Protestant evangelicals considered their faith to be the normative American creed, all right? So all this talk about America being a Christian nation, we come by this honestly. This has been around a long, long time. But of course, the real questions are, what do you mean by Christian? And how does that sort of function in the imaginary? Viewed from their dominant perspective, the 19th century had been marked by successive advances in evangelicalism, the American nation, and hence the kingdom of God, because it was that tight for many people. Although many saw some unmistakably ominous portents, few expected evangelical progress to cease. The Civil War, widely interpreted as a true apocalyptic contest, just seeing the battle hymn of the Republic, if you can find it, or just review the words, it's all in there, it's taken straight from the Book of Revelation, had been the greatest test of American evangelical civilization. Now again, see what is interesting here is because when I read this, when I say evangelical, at least for many people who are conditioned by American mass media, you tend to think of the Bible Belt in the South. But this is referring to the victors of the Civil War. This is referring to the North. These are the evangelicals, okay? The abolition movement being sort of a radical fringe of them, but these are the evangelicals. And the church in the South, they're about, they took a drubbing in the Civil War. They lost, they lost, they lost in just about every way. So Marsden isn't talking about people in Alabama and Mississippi and Texas, although he is to a degree, but these are the northerners. For many northerners, the victory confirmed, as one Presbyterian observer put it, that we as individuals and as a nation are identified with that kingdom of God among men, which is righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. Let's see if Kendall will behave nicely on the, George L. Prentiss, The National Crisis, The American Theological Review, 1862. And he's got various other sightings of it. Mission enthusiasts foresaw similar advances worldwide. The sublime idea of the conversion of the world to Christ, said Professor Samuel Harris of Yale in 1870, has become so common as to cease to awaken wonder. The seemingly inexhaustible power of spiritual awakenings was foremost among the factors that generated such confidence. America, lacking many older institutions, had been substantially influenced by revivalism. The negative associations of revivals primarily with excess or with the frontier were only distant memories. And again, George Marsden wrote a book on significant biography on Jonathan Edwards, where, well, there you have the awakening and enthusiasms on the frontier. Now for us, the frontier was quite a bit further east than the frontier that most of us are conditioned to think about. Awakenings were now most respectable and even necessary signs of vitality in cities as much as in the countryside, among the educated as certainly among the unlettered. The most immediate common memories were of popular revivals that had swept through army camps, both northern and southern, but the outstanding model for revival was the great revival of 1857 to 1858. These awakenings centered in cities. That's important because again, when we think about revival, we tend to think evangelical revival. We tend to think rural areas. But these were evangelical revivals in cities. This was an urban movement. These awakenings centered in the cities grew out of noonday prayer meetings led by businessmen and bankers. Revival was not confined to the poor or the ignorant. Most college educated Americans had attended schools where periodically intense spiritual outpourings were expected among the student body. Revivalism in 1870 suggested such names as Jonathan Edwards, Timothy Dwight, Lyman Beecher, and especially Charles Finney, whose career was near its end. All with strong New England ties and all distinguished educators known by their title president. The example set by these illustrious forebearers who had met the challenges of enlightenment infidelity with spirituality, now again, what do we mean by that word? And intellect gave confidence for the new era. This confidence was the prevailing mood at the international meeting of the Evangelical Alliance in New York in 1873. The ideas expressed at this meeting provide a fair sample of the conventional evangelical wisdom of the day. At critical times and in the presence of hosts of unbelief, in the words of a typical spokesman, the spiritual interests of the nation have been saved by revivals. Skepticism might again be growing, yet if still there are Pentecostal effusions, primitive Christianity survives and will yet indicate its reality and potency by a repetition of early victories. The evangelical commitment to social reform. Now again, when I say evangelical, most of us are probably thinking, okay, those are cultural conservatives attempting to hold things back. But in the 1870s, the evangelicals were the cultural progressives looking to bring in the kingdom of God, its all its fullness into American culture. The evangelical commitment to social reform was a corollary of the inherited enthusiasm for revival. Reform was in a sense subordinate to revival in that it was usually considered to be effective only when it flowed from hearts transformed from self-love to love for others. Now we're sort of getting into Jordan Peterson territory here because Peterson's emphasis on the individual, well, in this sense, Peterson isn't that far from these people because the world is saved when individuals, at least in Peterson's mind, with Peterson's aspect, take responsibility for themselves. That's how the world is saved. And I just saw an article in Twitter that Jordan had tweeted about women needing to take responsibility for themselves. It was a very pro-Jordan Peterson article by a woman in a woman's magazine that basically said we're infantilizing women by lying to them about how hard life is and they too need to take control of their own lives, et cetera, et cetera. So again, reform in a sense subordinate to revival in that it was usually considered to be effective only when it flows from the hearts transformed from self-love to love for others. Now again, we're looking at these themes that are in our world that sort of are, seem to be owned by one side or the other, especially in the mass media image, which is fueled in our imagination. Well, love for others, isn't that a progressive, isn't that a progressive value? Well, no, it's a Christian value. Christianity is a universal philanthropist, declared a British preacher at the Evangelical Alliance in a line of thought with which his American listeners would not disagree. It trains the young, it feeds the hungry, it heals the sick, it rejoices in the increase of the elements of material civilization. It maintains that all these agencies are subordinate. The divine method of human improvement begins in human hearts through evangelical truth and spreads from within outwardly till it is all renewed. Yet social reform was not really a secondary consideration. At least it might not be dispensed with or substantially ignored. The assumption that Christianity was the only basis for a healthy civilization, again, when you hear this, oh, Christian nationalism, yeah, 1870 we're talking, broadly assumed by the winning side of the Civil War and shared by those who were in the defeated part of the Civil War as well, and shared, quite frankly, by many African American churches. Now, you can find these positions if you read a lot of what Dr. King wrote, you'll find this stuff coming through his messages. He basically called America to, hey, there's a promise there's a promissory note. Virtue among the citizenry, as almost all political economists said, was the foundation of a successful civilization, especially a Republican civilization. Now, remember, in some ways, these democracies are, at least, especially when you get to the First World War, going to face off against the Kaiser. Well, Kaiser, what is Kaiser? Kaiser is Caesar. And so, you're already seeing this fight between democracy and monarchy, and monarchy is seen as tyrannical, and democracy of free, you can see just how Protestant this is, democracy of free individuals, that's strength. Religion was the basis of true virtue. The purer the religion, the higher the morality. Christianity was the purest religion. The supposed self-evident superiority of Western civilization, and especially Northern Europe, was clearly due to the influence of Christianity and Protestantism in particular. All right, now again, that article that I read about what happens in the Civil Rights Movement, and I would say the Civil Rights Movement in conjunction with the Counterculture Movement, is we see a shift in this. Americans were proud of their own unique achievement since they had shown that the moral basis of national success could be maintained voluntarily without an officially established church. In what sense can this country be called a Christian country, asks Reverend Theodore Dwight Wolsey, retired president of Yale, in an addressed lauding separation of church and state. In this sense, certainly, he continued, that the vast majority of people believe in Christianity and the gospel, that Christian influences are universal, that our civilization and intellectual culture are built on that foundation, and that the institutions are so adjusted as, in the opinion of almost all Christians, to furnish the best hope for spreading and carrying down to posterity our faith and our morality. The Northern victory and the Civil War had mixed effects on the reform impulse. On one hand, the outcome seemed evidence of God's endorsement of the sacred character of the Union and the Constitution. Few outside Dixie questioned that. Moreover, the Republican Party, which in its reforming origins stood against Rum and Romanism, as well as rebellion, was in the ascendant. Now again, notice, you have the roots here of teetotalism, you have the roots here of the Prohibition Movement, this is 1870, it's a few decades before, but decades do take by, and against Romanism, the Pope, monarchy, they're all part of a thing. This is a different movement from another side, and so the Republicans are against Rum and Romanism, as well as rebellion, as was the ascendant. Yet there was a sense of excess in reform and a desire for stability. In other words, reform gets overheated, and then, well, all your people on the spectrum who are low in agreeableness start to get touchy. The slavery issue had been resolved only at immense cost, and no other reform captured the popular imagination. A few, including the aged Finney, attempted to revive anti-masonry. Others founded the Prohibition Party in 1869, and the Women's Christian Temperance Union in 1874. There's a temperance hall not too far from here, that drive by and it's like temperance hall, and people are like, wonder what that is about. Some spoke out for women's rights or care for the freed slaves, and again, you listen to this and think, no, wait a minute, is this, we see that in the light of our political polarities, but that was not the case then. Some worked for a Christian amendment to the Constitution. Well, who today would work for a Christian amendment to the Constitution? Others proposed campaigns against worldly amusements. Well, that's completely caved away, hasn't it? Most of the causes were old ones. Almost all were motivated by the desire to ensure the stability of evangelical civilization. Now, again, what is evangelical connected with? Democracy, freeing the slaves, personal responsibility, personal commitment to Jesus Christ, and out of that flows not only the individual reform, but the social reform. Perhaps the continuing interest in sabbatarianism, and you might say, well, what's that? That's not doing things on Sunday. The Christian reform church when I was growing up was very much a sabbatarian denomination, much more so even than other more American denominations. And so, sabbatarianism, perhaps the continuing interest in sabbatarianism best illustrates this concern. The Puritan Sabbath was probably the most distinctive symbol of evangelical civilization in the English-speaking world, and remains a major reform issue where religious and social interests coincide. In view of the increasing complexity of modern life, affirmed the Congregational National Council of 1871, the rest of the Sabbath is indispensable to the continuance of health, virtue, and Christian principle in this nation. Now, let me remind you that church attendance doesn't, again, reach its peak until the middle of the Cold War. And that might take you as a surprise because it sounds like America is a very Christian nation. Yeah, but as I mentioned in the last video, what is mediating the faith? Well, it's prayer in public schools. It's learning to read with the Bible. This Christian nationalism is just shot through the country, but nobody pays much attention to it. In fact, you don't even have, in God we trust on the coinage, nor do you have one nation under God in the Pledge of Allegiance. All of that will come during the Cold War. But notice how Christianity, what it means to be a Christian, Protestantism, all of these things come together in a whole vision of life. And we would imagine, of course now, what today we would consider the most evangelical part of the country, which would be the Bible Belt, the old rebel states, the old Confederate states. Well, they wouldn't be in this parade at all, or not much because that's all Northern stuff. And you can begin to get a sense of the radical transformations that have happened in this country, which George Marsden is one of the best historians to tell that story. Mark Hopkins, famed model of college teachers and presidents held that God's law agreed with the interests of working people. Using the familiar terminology of the prevailing moral philosophy, Hopkins argued that people had a right to one day's rest, not two, because their God-endowed moral constitution was pre-conformed to the Sabbath rhythm. While evangelicals agreed that Sabbath desecration had reached alarming proportions, they remained convinced that a proper recognition of the sanctity of the Holy Sabbath is one of the chief cornerstones of the foundation of the church and of our Christian civilization. So when I was growing up in New Jersey, in New Jersey, we still had Sunday Blue laws. In fact, I don't know if this is connected with it, you still can't pump your own gas in New Jersey. I think that's something else going on. But Sunday, Sabbath Blue laws, Sunday Blue laws continued well into the 20th century. And it was only the end of the 20th century that in many states and many localities, stores began to open on Sunday and people began to shop on Sunday. And we've seen that, shopping on Christmas, shopping on Thanksgiving, the sabbatarian impulse was strong. The evangelical interest in sabbatarianism and other causes involved genuine concern for the welfare of the laboring classes and the poor. But their outlook was middle-class Victorian and their program to meet the challenges of the 1870s was essentially conservative. Okay, notice again, well, this is welfare and care for the poor. Now I've been watching Downton Abbey and you can see some of this in the culture there. It is, it is, I gotta think of his name now. It's Matthew's mother who is caring for the prostitutes and caring for the sick. And you get that sense of this moral cause, this noblesse oblige by the aristocracy and the mobility for the, and the nobility for the poor. All this is very Christian. And I think part of what's interesting about Downton Abbey is just how secularized it is to our modern, they get married in church, but that's about it. Now, again, I'm reading about American history, not so much English history. This was evidence in the day devoted to Christianity and social reform in the 1873 evangelical alliance, Christian philanthropy and the care of the sick and intemperance and its suppression, crime and criminals, industrial schools and the prevention of crime and the labor question were on the agenda. Only the last of these dealt with the new American social problem. And the advice given was that, although laborers had some legitimate complaints, the causes might be removed gradually and safely by wise and conservative legislation. Strikes lead to ruin. American evangelicals enjoyed a remarkable consensus about the economic and moral laws that supported a sound economic system, that is the prevailing free enterprise system. College courses and political economy, usually taught by college presidents, almost invariably inculcated the same principles. President M.B. Anderson of the University of Rochester told the evangelical alliance that the Bible and reason agreed that the pursuit of wealth by legitimate processes is in entire harmony with morality and depends upon it. The right to property and inheritance were sacred but must be balanced by the law of benevolence. The truest charity, which educates and trains the poor into the capacity to supply their own wants by their own labor and skill. Socialism stood in antithesis to these laws. Socialism, that specter which so haunts the European mind, says Anderson, is the creation of those to whose minds the intelligent self-restraint born of an educated conscience is a stranger. Education then, broadly conceived as education and Christian morality, stood next to preaching the gospel itself as an answer to new industrial and urban problems. And you're gonna see in this process, and Marston's gonna go through this, where education begins to sort of part ways with what's going on here. There's gonna be a great divide, it was together and it's gonna be pulled apart. At the time it appeared that American evangelicalism was still dominant in the American schools. Public schools used texts like McGuffey's Reader, which warned against hard drink, lauded the values of the Bible and the rewards of Sabbath keeping and hard work and above all stressed that virtue which would be rewarded. Now, I wouldn't be surprised if you can still get McGuffey's Reader but we would imagine that those who get it are these homeschooling wackos. But remember, this was the main line in the country. The same lessons were taught in colleges. Indeed, it was still true that the presidents of most colleges were ordained clergymen. In the 1870s, the revolutionary trend towards universities, elective courses and separation of the disciplines and academic freedom on the premise that there might be more than one variety of truth was just beginning. For Victorian evangelicals, orthodox piety and theological dogmatism combined with a classical curriculum still provided the basis of an education that would sustain a stable civilization. Now again, I'm reading this and some of you are gonna think, oh, these are medieval values. No, I'm talking about 1870. This older order correlated faith learning and morality with the wealth of civilization. Two premises were absolutely fundamental. That God's truth was a single unified order and that all persons of common sense were capable of knowing that truth. The implication of these assumptions were carefully worked out by the philosophical school known as Scottish common sense realism. In 1870, common sense philosophy had been influential in America for a century and for the past half century, it had been the dominant philosophy taught in American colleges. In spite of competition from various forms of romantic idealism, common sense realism maintained unquestionably the American philosophy. Common sense philosophy was marvelously well suited to the prevailing ideas of American culture. This was not entirely accidental since the American nation and Scottish realism both took shape in the mid 1700s. This philosophy was above all democratic or anti elitist. Common sense said that the human mind was so constructed that we can know the real world directly. Some philosophers, particularly those following John Locke, had made our knowledge seem more complicated by interposing ideals between us and the real world. Now this gets very interesting because when you look at our world today and you look at sort of the heirs of common sense philosophy, well there really aren't too many but if I would have to pin it on someone, I would probably say it's celebrity atheists and it's a certain brand of modernism that believes in a certain directness. And so there's a lot that has changed in this. Now he goes on a while about common sense philosophy and it's worth reading. More importantly, this common sense account of reality was considered to provide a sure basis for the rational and scientific confirmations of the truths of the Bible and the Christian faith. And you can still hear these echoes in some of these atheist Christian debates but part of the reason it's going away is because this whole philosophical underpending or the shadows of it or the echoes of it are going away. The Bible, it was constantly asserted, was the highest and all sufficient source of authority. Indeed in America the Bible was the primary source for many of the ideals that shaped the culture. The Protestant doctrine of the perspicuity of scripture provided a further basis for the belief that the common person could readily understand Bible biblical teaching. Common sense paralleled this doctrine with its insistence on the perspicuity of nature. And again, coming from this you can see where a meaning crisis is going to come from. In an age that reverenced science, it was essential that this confidence in scripture not be based on blind faith alone. God's truth was unified and so was inevitable that science would confirm scripture. Evangelical colleges still use the text and arguments of Bishop Joseph Butler, analogy of religion, natural and revealed to the constitution and courses of nature, 1736, and William Paisley, natural theology, 1802, to demonstrate the truth of Christianity. No honest inquirer, the evangelical apologist asserted, if true to his own experience, could finally doubt the arguments when they were properly understood. Over and above the evidence of design and nature, there were simply too many parallels between the laws of civilization as discovered by impartial science and the teachings of the Bible to leave room for reasonable doubt. Faith, said Mark Hopkins, that is, the faith of the New Testament is not simple belief, it is confidence in a person and that confidence is never given except on rational grounds. Now if you understand this, you can see how things are going to collapse in terms of this whole edifice, even though you can still find these ideas worked pretty commonly on YouTube. The old order of American Protestantism was based on the interrelationship of faith, science, the Bible, morality, and civilization. It was about to crumble. In 1869, Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr., who moved in a sophisticated Unitarian churches in Boston, predicted the impending catastrophe. The collapse would not be as dramatic, however, as that of Holmes' famous One Haw Shea. Too many vested interests in the churches and indeed of civilization itself, he observed privately, rested on evangelical idolatry and bibliolatry. For these to be removed all at once, as the magnetic mountain drew the nails and bolts of Sinbad's ship. Churchmen could hardly be expected to admit the implications of the new views frankly, yet Holmes was convinced that a vital part of the whole structure was about to be removed. The Bible could no longer stand up to scientific standards. Without that, little would remain that was distinctly evangelical. The truth is staring the Christian world in the face. That is, the stories of the old Hebrew books cannot be taken as literal statements of fact. In the 1870s, evangelicals frequently commented to each other on the seriousness of the new threats, though they did not share Holmes' conclusions. Infidel bugles are sounding in front of us. Papal bugles are sounding behind us, declared Professor Roswell Hitchcock at the Evangelical Alliance in 1873. It would be idle to say, he confessed, that we are not alarmed. At no time, wrote W.A. Sterns, president of Amherst College, a similar context, has Christianity been assaulted in such variety and persistency of argument for its overthrow as during the 100 years just past. Yet it seemed that whenever evangelical leaders voiced such concerns, they followed with declarations of confidence that those who had nearly driven out the skepticism, atheism, and even deism of the enlightenment from American public life could still look to new victories. Never since the crucifixion, Sterns continued, has the religion of Christ in its purest form had a stronger hold on the popular heart than at this day. This kind of assurance was unmistakably prevailing, was unmistakably the prevailing note at the Evangelical Alliance. Unity, of course, said alliance speakers, was necessary for continued advance, but by working together, they could surely affect to lift up among all peoples a victorious standard in the face of modern skepticism, rationalism, and the claims of the papacy and every other false system. I'll stop reading there, but there's plenty more of that in the book, and he goes into quite a bit more detail in telling this story and tracing what happens. But again, I wanted to at least point out where we've come from because, well, if you look at today, you find that, well, some things line up and some things don't seem to line up. Now just recently, Glenn Scrivner sent me a note and told me about these videos. Alec Ryrie out of Gresham College on atheism, and they're really wonderful lectures. I don't know much about him, but I'm sure you'll educate me in the comments section. It's really helpful to gain perspective on these things by going back over this history. Okay, what do we mean by atheism? What are the different forces at play with respect to these questions? And so part of the reason I like reading Marsden here is because we begin to see this sea change, and we begin to see how things very quickly begin to change in American history. And so as I continue to think through, okay, well, why am I reading these old books to you? Why are we talking about Marsden? Why do I keep pausing every time I hit this word spiritual? Because all of these things are still among us. And this is part of the reason that I look at the culture war and say, well, it's really a civil war. Because yeah, these groups, these issues have been going for a long time. So I just wanted to give you a little bit of taste of Marsden there. And if you're interested in the book, it's available on Kindle. It's available on Audible. I, yeah, I sell a lot of books apparently, but there aren't a lot of real cheap used one, which is a shame because the book's been out a long time. And I believe the difference be, if you can get an older edition cheaper, that might be worth your while if you want a paper copy of it, because apparently he didn't do much changing of the main text. He decided instead to add a new preface and then add a new chapter at the end and some of the latter editions. So very much recommend Marsden's, let me pull up the, very much recommend Marsden's Fundamentalism and American Culture. And again, for those of you sort of waiting on the evangelism series, I had that one video about how I got here. I'm working on that as well. And I'm still keeping an eye on the sexuality series. Christian Reformed Church is not sure whether or not it's going to do Synod this summer or not. We'll find that out towards the end of February. And then the Christian Reformed Church has to figure out what to do with this report on human sexuality. But all of this stuff runs together. And yeah, it all runs together. And all these videos that I do do, I think are connected. And, but I know some of you aren't as interested in one piece or another. So thanks for watching.