https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8hVkD4t9EYs

 And we can begin. So, Dale, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? All right. My name is Dale. I am 42, live in the Minneapolis area. I have been, where do we want to go with this? Sorry. That's totally okay. This was all planned out in my head and then all of a sudden it's like, wait a second, I have to actually do this now. So, 42, live in the Minneapolis area. Happily, your laugh makes everything just smooth right out. There's really nothing bad that's going to happen here. So just go after it. It's very funny. So, work as a chemist, married, have three kids, and have been a Christian pretty much all my life. So, kind of had the prototypical evangelical upbringing. I think about when I was born, so 1978, grew up in the 1980s, it was very much this transition period in, at least my experience, in sort of the Protestant evangelical church. So, my grandma, or both my grandparents and my parents all kind of got, went through the born again experience in the 1970s, Jesus people movement, that whole deal when so many people had that same experience. With my grandma's experience, she had been part of her church for all of her life. And they had not really let it be, not let it, what, not let it colonize their life to use the lingo here. And was, so far as I understand the story, was actually getting ready to do one of the scripture readings for a church service one week. And all of a sudden went, oh my gosh, this is real. This whole thing is, this is not just a thing I do on Sundays, I ought to actually like, be doing this. And it was part of that whole movement of the born again deal in the 1970s. So, that sort of propagated throughout that side of the family. And that was that. So, grew up very much in a Christian home, very much in the sort of born again deal. Public school or Christian school? Public school. Okay. Yep. Yeah. So, it's an interesting transition. It was sort of a fun exercise going through a bit of my history thinking about this. Because early in life, I went to a Lutheran church. It was ELCA, but still relatively traditional back in my very early years in how they did church. So, it was liturgy and robes and responsive readings and all that stuff. And, you know, as a kid, it's sort of not the most exciting thing. But as time went on in this, it was, the church had, you know, tons of young people coming out of the 70s, all having this born again deal, all wanting to do this Jesus movement thing. You know, pretty soon, we went from, I don't even think there was amplification there when I was a kid. It was a fairly big building, but it was still very traditional in that sense. So, we go from something that would have been more or less recognizable to somebody 200 years ago, this is the way a Lutheran church does a thing, to over maybe a 10-year period go from, we've added a piano and it's a little bit controversial and we're going to sing some praise choruses here. Yeah. All the way to, by the time I'm in high school in the 90s and it's full band and drums and guitars and stuff. So, the whole secret transition. Yes. So, it was, I thought it was great. I was glad that we were singing fun songs and not having to do the boring stuff anymore. And now it's interesting looking back or looking at where things are going now in the kind of people that I'm listening to now with yourself and Jonathan Peugeot and Alistair Roberts and all these people that are like, liturgy is the thing. This is interesting. I had been so just ensconced in my own little world that I thought, oh, well, this is great and this is what I like and this is good and this is the way a person does Christianity. And so, pretty much, I've got my own notes here and I make sure I don't forget anything. The liturgy is the thing is by no means a non-controversial topic. If you go to the discord and you talk, in this little corner of the internet, liturgy may be the thing, but out there on the streets, the big sound and the big show is still a very, very big deal. Yes, yeah, that's very true. So, yeah, it's just not something I had really thought about before, how quickly that transition went. So, that was an interesting thing, very much part of my life. So, proceeded through typical sort of church youth group deal. So, mission trips and church camp and lock-ins and my church had a splendid church camp they bought in the 1960s. They bought this beautiful camp area up in northern Minnesota on a lake. So, I spent many a fine summer up there doing the church camp thing and having the prototypical spiritual high experience. And through all of this, I never had any kind of real rebellion in it. I grew up going to church because that's what my parents did and never found a reason to not want to. And so, slowly, over time, through teenage years, very much wanted to start to make it my own or whatever the lingo is that you're going to associate with that. So, slowly began to maybe sort of find my identity in being the good Christian kid with all of the various hubris of pride that might go into it. Maybe looking back a little bit, I wasn't always the good Christian kid, but I thought I was. All that stuff. But for the most part, really wanting to do this Christian thing as best I could. Late in high school, I really started reading the Bible more for myself and finding it. Yeah, what did you find? You know, it's a big thing. I remember a couple times, you know, a lot of it is just reading it and not totally getting it. But I remember, you know, maybe reading 1 John for the first time myself and the very black and white, as you've mentioned, and all of the, you know, you really ought to be, I don't know if that's, you know, be perfect as your father in heaven is perfect, or that's another spot. But that theme very much runs through 1 John and reading that going, yes, oh my, I'm not quite doing that. How exactly is one supposed to do this Christian life here? So, there was that. But generally, just generally finding the faith persuasive and something that I very much wanted to pursue. So that gets to kind of end of high school going to college thinking, okay, I want to do this Christian thing. And I want to do the Christian college thing really having no idea what that might entail. I went to the University of Minnesota. So very, very large, 50,000 people on campus, I think, kind of university stayed in despite the fact that it was in town, stayed in the dorm my first year there to kind of get that college experience. Okay, I'm going to do this, this Christian college thing. And so yeah, like I said, not really knowing what that would entail, start getting mailers in the dorm as I move in the week before class. And it's all the big Christian group saying, oh, come and hang out with us. And there'll be food and fun and friends and stuff. I got that. I got a good church. I got friends. I'm not looking for the social thing. I want to do this rah rah Christian thing. So first day, actually, on campus, walking to class, another one of those sort of turning point moments that sort of stuck in my head, get a flyer from some guy that I did not know at the time for flyer saying no apathy Bible study. I thought, oh, I'm intrigued by this. It appeals to that maybe good Christian kid, a little bit of pride and I'm like, okay, this is the thing that I think I want. Ended up at the Bible study the next day. This is fall of 1997 with a room full of people, a good chunk of which are still part of my life to this day. Really? Yes. So that's cool. Yes. So I have a great deal of fondness for those early memories of college and getting in involved in this group. So it was turned out to be the sort of non-denominational, charismatic Jesus movement kind of ministry. So they had their student group that was on campus doing all of the campus student group things and then also a church that was just off campus to be an actual proper church or as proper as this church could ever be being a charismatic church. We issue propriety sometimes and find a bit of pride in that for good or for bad sometimes. But meets in an old sorority house, which is quite a thing. So a big banner on the front of it that says Jesus Christ is Lord of the University of Minnesota. So pretty much trying to like, look at us, look at us, look at us. We're the Christians. Pay attention to us. And I say that a little bit tongue in cheek. It was very excited about evangelism and rightly so. It was a lot of fun. So what did we learn there? So it was extremely exciting getting involved in this because growing up in just sort of normal sort of, say it was inner city, but essentially like suburban kind of church. And it was good and it was Sunday church and it was church camp and it was youth group and it was good. And then getting onto the campus where there's actually a pinch of resistance to Christianity. And we're out there just about every day they would do contact tables in the student union. So you just set up a table and put up some whiteboards with provocative questions, sometimes provocative, just stuff to get conversations going. So you always got stuff going on interacting with the student body doing special presentations, trying to get people in the room and talk about whatever topic you might want to talk about. And really it's about getting the gospel in front of people. And it was extraordinarily exciting for quite a while there doing this Jesus thing and thinking, yeah, this is great. So ended up getting baptized or re-baptized depending on whose version you want to look at it because I was infant baptized and did the believers baptism. So really went fairly all in with this, I would say. There was the worship was a big part of it. Worship music was obviously a big part of it. I had grown up, you know, sort of playing, I played the trumpet in middle school band and had found to some degree a love of music. Not like some people do. They go really whole hog for it. But then played in a rock band early in college. That was quite a thing. There was this whole, during kind of the back half of the 90s, early 2000s, there's very much this sort of Christian rock deal. Partially came out of the evangelical building, parallel society to things. We're Christians and we like rock music and we want to do this stuff in sort of a Christian way. And sometimes people look at it cynically to some degree. But in the moment when it's 1995 and I had grown up only ever hearing sort of cheesy 1970s Christian music or whatever. And then all of a sudden find that there's this whole world of music that I like with people singing about things that are relevant to me. It's like, this is the best! There was a little Christian music club in town that, you know, once, twice, three times a month all of the cool underground Christian bands would come through. And this is amazing. My friends, we started a band, we played in their battle of the band and stuff. Those, I very much had a soft spot for music in that time. And so then moving into this Charismatic Church where you talk with Paul Landleitner when he talked about worship being the sacrament of the Charismatic Church. It was like, hearing him put it that way, it was like, oh, oh, oh, I see what she did there. When you think about very religiously loaded words like real presence and whatnot, and that's what you're looking for. So there was this very big jump moving from, you know, in my home church we had fun music and I always appreciated the worship there. But moving to this next level of seeking this real presence, if you will, that was quite a thing. So the worship was and is a big part of that and has been a big influence on my life. I ended up getting involved in the music team there and learned to play the drums, learn to play the guitar, learn to sing. It might be, I say, up in the air whether or not the singing is particularly good, but we're doing the best I can there and trying to sort of carry on the legacy of this church of loving music and trying to make that very much a central part of the worship experience. So very big into the gifts of the spirit there, which for some people is such a controversial thing depending on the background that you come from. But it was funny in my experience because my church growing up just never really talked about it. And I guess I'm not sure what sort of answer I would have gotten if I asked about it, but it was just sort of assumed that, I don't know, this stuff is fine if you want, but I'm talking about it. So I show up there and they say, yeah, gifts are for today and we're gonna go about doing them as best we can. Is that real? Okay, well, let's give it a try then see what happens. So that's quite a thing. And I I'm gonna break my notes here. There we go. So yeah, that was an interesting and I would say good addition to my faith. How'd you become a chemist? Ah, or am I jumping ahead of the script? I don't want to jump ahead of the script. No, so it's sort of interesting. We'll talk school school instead of the Christian side of school a little bit. So I was one of those sort of sciencey, maybe if I grew up in this day and age, I would have been on the spectrum, being the sort of introverted, very focused, but sort of socially awkward kind of kid. I don't know if I'm really that bad. But anyway, always growing up. You mean you're way in the charismatic church. You can't be that bad. I mean, quiet Lutheran, you know, going through the liturgy is one thing, but yeah, charismatic musician. That's another thing. I know it's, I like to think I'm relatively well rounded in there. I'd like to hope at least so grew up very much with that sort of mindset, liking just normal little boy liking the technology stuff, the sciencey, mathy side of things. Throughout high school, I was always the kind of person who was just smart enough to be kind of just above average enough to not really have to work at these things. But it sort of came back a bit later. So you find the edge where you have to start working. Hopefully you develop any bad habits before that of not being able to push through things. That did come into somewhat of a problem once I got to college. So I thought, you know, I like this stuff. I really enjoyed chemistry in high school, you know, the whatever, two years or year and a half or whatever you take a bit thing. All right, I like this and my 17 year 18 year old self, I'll go to school and do this for the rest of my life and started out in chemical engineering, which is sort of chemistry combined with lots and lots and lots of other things. And I think lots and lots and lots of math. And what I discovered relatively early on is that I rather enjoyed the chemistry did not I just did not have the chops for the math that was required for it. So I had a school was not great for me. Partially, partially, there was a lot of focus on the ministry side. It was not like that. That necessarily had to be a bad thing. But maybe I let myself focus on that because it was a lot more a lot more fun. So anyway, started out in chemical engineering found that that was not going to fly ended up transitioning over to chemistry and ended up sort of in and out of school for a little while. As I tried to pay tuition and get off academic probation and all that jazz. But oh, like I say, I did not learn how to push through some of these things. But I had gotten a sort of part time lab technician job while I was in school and found that I really enjoyed the work and working in the lab doing this sort of chemistry, I do product development stuff. So the making of things via chemistry is extremely rewarding. So I found out that I really liked that. And happily, in the days before Jordan Peterson, you know, telling me to clean my room, I was surrounded by a good body of church people and family saying, you're going to have to pull yourself together and clean your room and make this thing happen, because it's going to go badly for you if you don't. So I was extremely blessed to have people tell me these things that I knew were true and didn't want to be true and didn't want to deal with. But ended up making happen making happen. So yeah, I ended up before finishing school ended up getting a full time job as a very entry level lab technician, got hired on there full time. And then they ended up helping me with tuition reimbursement to finish off just the last like three or four courses that I had to do to wrap up my degree. And yeah, so plowing, plowing on from there. And marriage came in you married with three kids. So you found a wife at some point. Yes, I did. That was another big driver towards you know, wanting to get a job. Yeah. So yeah, no, it was, it was a again, a fun and exciting time of life sort of early 2000s. It felt like school had fallen apart. And I wasn't sure what was going to do with my life. And it felt like everything sort of hit a bottom. And it's like, you know, you tumble down a cliff and finally get to the bottom and go kerflump. And here's this lovely young woman who we take an interest in each other is like, oh, come on, how am I going to make this happen now? It was she she had gotten saved a few years earlier, come out of some some rough times and had shown up at the church just looking for for family and for healing and stuff. So she was a person that when she first showed up and first was there, she was just this girl that cried in the back of church during service and and didn't really notice her but around the same time. I think I was probably, you know, playing the drums in church and look out and see her worshiping full heartedly and think, oh, where's Brenda? Look at that. And similar time to that. It's like, playing the drums there. It's seems like sort of a sort of a nice dude or something. And yes, if it came to pass that we started getting to know each other and thought this is this is a good match here and didn't really want to admit it for a while because neither of us were exactly in the place where we could really pursue a relationship. And but yes, there are far worse places to meet people than church. Very much so that and in a church that pushes you to doing relationships responsibly and is very much into family and kids and all that stuff. So it worked out for the best. It felt a little dicey but looking back on it, it's what the kind of diciness that you feel going down a roller coaster that I'm not in control and this is very fast but you get to the end is like, that was actually really fun. So that's been good. So where did I leave off here? So yeah, that's you actually asked about work and life right about when I was going to get there. So yeah, lived in the church house for a couple years. So yeah, like the church met in an old sorority house. So we'd had church on the main level and kind of expanded stripped out living room. And then we had a floor for women's women living and another floor for the men to live on. Interesting. Yeah, because you need a little bit of with communal bathrooms, you need a bit of separation there. Yeah. But yeah, that the sort of communal Christian living was, it was a lot of fun. Learning how to live with other people is an excellent skill. It is. And a skill that's not sufficiently valued because I'll tell you, many of the, I mean, most of the stuff that you deal with is people living with people, whether it's spouses or parents or children or I mean, people living with people. We're not easy to live with all the time. Yep. So yeah, that was a lot of fun. And that was, you know, again, these, living with these guys, you know, one of whom is my brother-in-law now, other folks that are still deep members of the church. So folks that I have this like 20 year history now of doing campus ministry together and then living in this house together and then all getting married and raising our kids together. So yeah, it's good. It's real good. So that has been, that's been good. So we start to move on to more recent times. So being a campus church, it's always been the kind of place that has been somewhat of a passing through church for a lot of people. So despite the fact that there's been this core of folks that I've been with for a long time, we've always had folks that'll show up and show up and stay through their academic career and then move on. And being a little independent, charismatic church, conservative, not a lot of structure, what do you want to say? Sometimes the leaving is not always the happiest. And so as we get into some of these more recent times when all of a sudden, you know, 2015 or so, it feels like the world turns upside down. All of a sudden, these things that we could all just kind of overlook or live with each other, all of a sudden, it feels like everything is on edge and everything is a little bit more difficult to just say, oh, well, you know, maybe we disagree on this or that, but it's okay. And it's been the sort of funny thing. So I think, so it's how I've dealt with a lot of these things over my life as sort of an adult, adultish, shall we say. So you mentioned, you know, the chemist going to a charismatic church. I've always been on the skeptical side of some of these things. Like I'm perfectly on board with the fact that the Bible says that there's these spiritual gifts and there is all sorts of weirdness that happens. I'm like, okay, Bible says so I'm good with that. I may be less convinced by some of the outworkings of it. And I remember, you know, one time going to a- It's funny because people often think in charismatic churches that everybody just believes when God told me this, it's like, no, in charismatic churches, they're far more skeptical of it because they're around it all the time. Oh, God told you that? Good, I'm glad. I'll wait until God tells me to. Exactly. So, you know, going to a conference very early on in college, I was still young and new to this stuff. And there's, you know, a lot bigger group, a lot bigger room, a lot bigger worship team. And we do all the worship and all the stuff. And in the charismatic world, it's not just singing songs, it's singing songs and then flowing in the spirit or what you want to call it and pretty much all the stuff that we do. And so I think that's the thing that I've been doing is I'm like, okay, I'm going to do this. It's not just singing songs. It's singing songs and then flowing in the spirit or what you want to call it. And pretty soon I look around and you got, you know, people twirling and giggling. And I'm like, really? Okay, so, this is all fake, then I guess, or not all fake, but there's, there was a lot more just emotion and a lot more of the this but I'm not just going to dive whole hog into a lot of this stuff. Similar, unlike, so it's very conservative church. Well, maybe have come to redefine what conservative means perhaps and as I take a longer look in the church, but conservative politically. In late 90s, early 2000s, you get the internet and you get all the people getting into sort of the conservative news and stuff and I start reading the various conservative web news stuff out there and in that time period. So, you know, oh, massive disruptions and troops smashing on borders and world exclusive and stuff like that never actually comes to this. Oh, so this is all fake then. Okay. And a lot of people don't realize there's, I mean, the, there's a whole charismatic Christian internet out there. That's really something. I mean, the prophecies, I mean, I got to Paul Anleitner and I talked about this, you know, the prophecies, the end time. I mean, there's the whole Christian internet. I mean, it's quite something. Yes, it is. It's something we get further on into to just very briefly sort of bounce off of the political side of things. So we get to 2015. I had never been particularly political, but being conservative, you think, you know, these are more or less my people. I never called myself a Republican, but these, they're more or less my people. You get into the Republican primary at that time and overwhelmingly, my people choose the guy who's interested in nothing but eye poking and shin kicking. And I'm like, this is not what I signed up for. We were- You know, I had always thought more in terms of, you know, the party of ideas, the party of responsibility and reality instead of feelings. And all of a sudden it's like, oh, maybe these aren't my people. Maybe I need to start reassessing where exactly it is that I am and what exactly it is that I believe and how I got to where I am and if that's actually where I want to be or whatever. So that's, you get that stuff going on. You get the, I think the transgender stuff was a lot of what made a lot of people kind of step back and go, what the heck is going on here? And start to go explore ideas a little bit more. Because I was well, maybe not well read, but you know, I've read a little C.S. Lewis and, you know, the sort of typical curious Christian trying to figure out their faith a little bit. Hadn't really questioned things too much and was happy to just go along with the flow and figure, this sounds more or less like what I believe. So what I believe is pretty much right. So yeah, good with this. So started, you know, exploring a little bit online, found some of what might be called the alt-light stuff in the beginning. People like Stefan Molyneux and my BS detector started going off pretty quick with some of that and thought, this is not good. Found Rod Dreher, read the Benedict Option and thought, this is a little bit more what feels right to me. So the idea that politics won't save us, that, you know, the sort of Christian hegemony of America is sort of cracking and there's just not a whole lot you can do. I mean, when the government is by the people, when those people don't want Christianity anymore en masse, politics is not going to go that way for you. So what do you do then? And his ideas are very interesting and having lived with actual Christians before, I don't know the idea about, you know, Christian community is very difficult. So yeah, yeah, yeah. But that's good. And from there, stumbled a little bit into that. I think I probably found Jordan Peterson through him and found him. Like I say, I, by that point, I was married, I had kids, I was working a stable job. I had already had people to tell me to clean my room, shall we say. So I found him interesting. I found his Bible stuff to my conservative evangelical mind, perhaps a bridge too far right off the bat. But it was interesting nonetheless. But then from there, found Jonathan Peugeot. And I think, I think it may well have been his literal versus symbolic interpretation of the Bible video, one of his older ones. And watch there. It's funny, because I'm not even sure what would have really prompted me to click on that and stuff. But watch it and went, oh, you're saying very much, can very different things than I would have ever interpreted the Bible. But you make a lot of sense. I find this unsettling. And then from there, found his talk with you and I, you know, being a Protestant, you maybe hit some more familiar chords to me in that way. But yeah, but with with Jonathan, it was very much, you know, oh, Christianity is a really big place. And it's been around for 2000 years. And it has grown and flourished in just about every culture on the planet. And it's going to look really different in different places in different times. And I need to, yeah. And it could start looking different here too. I mean, that's part of when I first started listening to Jonathan, it was like, what is he talking about? I mean, it was really sort of hard to figure out what was going on with Peugeot first. Yes. Yep. So I very much enjoyed him. And really from, I mean, your whole channel kind of started out talking about Jordan Peterson and has moved on from there to some extent, just because he's not doing much. But really what I have really appreciated from this movement or whatever we want to call it that's going on here is all of the people that I found that are that seem to be on sort of the same journey here. So yourself or Alistair Roberts or Glenn Scrivener is great and Esther and just a ton of these folks that are writing about talking about making videos about these same things and helping me to work through it and figure out what exactly is Christianity going to look like and what really is the right way to do things. Like it was funny, listen, I think it was probably one of Jonathan's videos talking to somebody about symbolism and finding the symbolic structures in the world. And I think this person was on the same page as them in terms of sort of biblical interpretation, but you still doing more of a low church kind of thing. So well, if you find all of these biblical structures or symbolic structures in the world, why are you still doing the low church thing? And it struck me as what seems like a complete non sequitur to me. Why would you think that that would then inform the fact that, well, obviously high church liturgy is the way that we all ought to live our lives and it's just, there's a lot to learn. And it's enjoyable learning it, but it's a little unsettling is exactly the way to go. I guess, yeah. But it feels like you can either just go nothing matters and this is all just intellectual exercises and go off on one side or you can just pick your tribe and go whole hog into that and ignore everything. Or my own interpretation as of, you know, six months ago or so, we'll probably change again, but you know, that's a straight and narrow. That's the narrow gate is finding that balance between extremism on either side and just walking by faith. So I find, you know, the mapped and unmapped territory dynamics really helpful because, you know, you're right. I think I first heard about Jordan Peterson through Rod Dreer as well. And then, well, why was I reading Rod Dreer? And Rod Dreer was always sort of a little bit more alarmist than I tend to be in terms of my temperament. But at the same time, there are other aspects of him that were and of his story that were attractive and engaging. You know, and there are lots of bumps along the road, obviously, if you read someone like Rod Dreer, the, you know, you know, the Iraq war, George W. Bush's Iraq war, the second Iraq war, that was a watershed moment within and I do not consider my part of conservatism at all in terms of American political spectrum. But that was a real watershed moment in terms of American conservatism that, hmm, it's maybe these people that we're following, we shouldn't be following them. And so, you know, over the last 10 years, there's just sort of been a constant stream of upheavals. Yes. And that's not just in politics, it's in religion. And, I mean, it's all over the place. And I really like how you put it in terms of, I mean, sort of what, sort of what's happening, we're getting thrown up into the air, and then we're sort of finding each other and thinking, okay, well, let's, they seem to be trying to figure things out, too. And some of what they're saying seems to be making some sense to me. So I'll listen to them and listen to these other people. And it's, we're all sort of do this together. And that's a good thing. Yes. Yeah, I very much appreciate that. And it's. So how has, you still have your day job, you haven't changed churches. I mean, that's the same thing for me. I still have my day job, except I have this YouTube stuff. I haven't changed churches. I've been in the same church for 22 years. We haven't changed. But, you know, Jonathan Pujo asked me, you know, asked me about my liturgy. And I said, it's a mess. And it is. You know, we're still at Livingstone's fairly low church, we're sort of traditional CRC in some ways, even though the music, music and the Christian Reformed Church got disrupted, just like many other traditions along the way. And so now we're, you know, the worship, you know, you had, you know, the worship war sort of hit. And then kind of everything blew apart. And a lot of places, things have landed sort of blended because, you know, now hymnals are for the most part, screens, screens, words on screens are a lot cheaper than hymnals. And, you know, technology has moved along. So how has this changed pieces of your life? I mean, what's that look like? So I have taken a fairly, maybe hands off approach. There's, insofar as, you know, a lot of people have started going to meetups or making YouTube videos or whatnot. And I'm being the sort of introverted, sciency, misanthropish kind of person by nature, that doesn't appeal to me. So it's been a lot more reading, listening, watching, slowly trying to figure stuff out on my own, you know, my wife and I will bounce this sort of stuff off of one another. Yeah, what's your wife think of all this? For the most part, she's on board with it, I guess. You know, she very much is like you will sometimes give me a reorienting eye roll if I share maybe a too hyperbolic Rod Rear blog post or something. I'll go, ah, yeah, you know, actually, there's some wisdom in that eye roll right there. And I need to tear me down a little bit. So there's been that. One thing that I have been trying to apply myself to is more in the musical side of things. So with a lot of the thinking side of this movement, philosophy has never really been my thing. And it's always looked at too daunting to really dive into it. I'm sure I could if I really wanted to, but it doesn't hold that kind of interest for me. And that I want to respond to this somehow. So I've tried, I've been, so with our church, there was a lot of music that had been written there over the years, folks writing their own worship songs, it sort of became our own, our own sort of family songs. And as people have moved on, I slowly learned a bit of audio production to then take our band and start recording these things so that they would not be forgotten over the years as people move on. And so I've slowly gotten to the point where I'm not bad at it anymore. And I have been trying to record music and moving then from there actually trying to write my own music, trying to capture what it is that's at least going on in myself. And so I say if I can't, there's more to this, it's trying to get away from the propositional Christianity to some degree and do more on the emotional, the beautiful, that side of stuff. So writing, recording, putting out music mostly just for friends and family right now. But having the goal out there of actually trying to make finished things and put them out there into the wider world is good impetus to improve my skills there. And also it's been, so the first sort of project that I undertook was taking a couple of David Psalms from when he was in the wilderness. So when you have the little little title, you know, Psalm of David, when he was in the cave, when he was on the run from his son Absalom, all of those sort of in the wilderness Psalms and setting those to music. And I very much found that interacting with the Bible in that way is a very different experience than just reading it or just hearing it, but actually taking it and maybe finding a chorus in there. But just the act of singing it and harmonizing it and then it's been extremely valuable to me. So I find that helpful. And hopefully I would like this to be something that I could eventually take and in no way make a business out of it, but be something that could be of value to other people. I have ways to go before maybe that is the case, but it's a lot of fun. Well, I love how you approach it in terms of, because I mean the Psalms, you know, way back when before I was born, the Christian Reformed Church was a Psalm only denomination. And since the Psalms are this seeming ever present font of song material, and so the guy who puts together our worship services, I mean he's always on the prowl for new music. And I'm amazed how many new versifications of Psalms come out. And then you, the way you talked about it, because I'm not a musician and I'm not making, you know, I play the violin here, but I'm not writing music, but just thinking about how writing, you know, putting Psalms to music and working that through what a sort of lectio divina process that is because you're meditating on the words and that's really cool. That's really cool. I'd never really thought of it that way, but that's really cool. I had neither, which is one of the fun things about going into a new venture is the stuff that you learn that you would never have expected. Yeah, yeah. Well, only about 10 minutes and of course I usually, you know, I don't know if there's anything you wanted to get to that we haven't got to. No, I think I was sort of playing it by ear here. So I figured if we got through the story, where I go next, I think, is the idea that, you know, a lot of people have come onto this channel very much seeking, and I guess to a large degree, I'm seeking in different ways to some extent. We all are. My whole channel is a process of my own seeking. I mean, all my monologue videos, I'm just trying to find my way through the world and the fact that people want to follow sort of live as I go through and make all these mistakes just baffles me, but hey, it's fun. So we're all finding each other and doing this together. I think it's wonderful. Yeah. So I can't say that I'm coming from a position of being, you know, just, I always say, sort of neutral, unaffected seeking. You know, I'm a Christian. I have not grown overly cynical of the church. I want to figure out how to make Christianity, you know, work in this newly upside down world. Specifically, I see people, I mean, how many have we seen in videos and talks and stuff recently with Douglas Murray and Tom Holland and, oh goodness, three or four other names that are alluding me, people that see Christianity as this benefit and oftentimes want to believe, but find that they can't. And there's lots of folks out there. I'm sure that if I were to make my way back onto the campus, I'm, you know, still part of the campus church, but not so much of the out on the campus ministry. I'm guessing I'd find a lot of young men who are feeling the same way, feeling jaded by the modern world, find some interest in this more traditional stuff, but they feel like they can't believe. And that would be, if I was seeking, if I'm hoping to get somewhere, it would be finding some way to bring them something. And I'm not sure what that something is, because I think the propositional side of things are not enough. I mean, maybe that's partially what the music thing is like. I don't have the propositions. I don't have the arguments to get you. So let me give you, let me sing for you or something. But that's- Well, I think that's what Paul Anleitner was talking about in terms of worship as the sacrament of the charismatic church, you know? And I think you just said it very, very well. And the crazy thing is that we don't even quite know what we're saying when we're saying, you know, believe. And obviously, you can't read the book of James and not notice, well, that means changing things in your life. And obviously, there's propositions that are involved in that. And, you know, it's perspectival, it's participatory, I mean, Verveki's four Ps. And so, you know, we are all sort of figuring this out together. And some of the hard lines that we, I mean, bright lines are really helpful for noticing movement. And so, you know, there's the four spiritual laws and the sinner's prayer and, you know, there's a bright line and whoop, whoop, you know. But what we're seeing now is that with everything upside down, there's either too many bright lines or the bright lines are fragmented. And so, we're sort of trying to figure out, okay, how can we orient ourselves in this world now? Yep. Yeah, it's difficult because there's so much where it felt like you just believe these things and you will be a Christian. It's sort of the extension of believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and you'll be saved. And we have taken that to mean, believe these things about Jesus. And what a lot of my exploring has done is has been to make me think, well, you know, likely, I probably do not have perfect doctrine. In some way, I'll probably get to heaven or maybe we don't talk about getting to heaven anymore. That's been another good little thing. Anyway, and, you know, God says, what was the deal with baptism? Obviously, you're supposed to be baptizing babies or who knows what. I'm fine with saying I probably don't have perfect, well, well, then how many things can I get wrong? How many wrong beliefs can I actually have? Can I believe all the wrong things? Interesting looking at more progressive side of things. The example that came to my mind was Jane Kostin writes for Vox. She's very progressive, but covers conservative things very charitably. So she's been a good person that I disagree with to listen to. She is Catholic and lesbian and married to another woman. And she's, you know, when she gets pushed back on this, it's like, I trust, I totally trust Jesus for my salvation. What more do you want? It's like, what more do I want? And so what if I want more? How does that change Jane? You know, you can yell at her and tell her she's going to hell and you can be mean or you can do all of those things. And now, and both of us are happy that in many ways, at least in the United States, the government to one degree or another stays out of it and she isn't being locked up. Neither of us want to see her sent to prison for whatever. So no, you're right. You're right. Yeah. So it's like, I would very much disagree with that position. But at the same time, it's like, yeah, I, it's more than just, it's more than just simply ascribing to a creed. So it's, it feels a little dicey, but at the same time, I want to find what the truth is. I want to, I want to find what God is doing and go do that as well. Yeah, no, that's right. Well, we're out of time, Dale, but this has been a delight. I will send this video to you and you can let me know, you know, if you'd like me to share it, if you just want to keep it between us, it's totally good. And then you can share it with your wife and maybe she'll roll her eyes at us. Yep. But this is, this is, I'm glad you found a slot. And I know I, I, people, you know, complain they can't find slots and I, I'm still trying to figure out, you know, because I, I basically have everything closed and then I look ahead in my schedule and, okay, I got some time that week, let's open some slots. And so that's how I'm sort of managing it now. And, and I know, I don't know, I, that's why I like the randos channel and the discord server, because again, it's that people can talk to me. Well, you know, that's fun and stuff because I'm on YouTube, but it's, it's more important that we find each other and we build relationships and, and do all that work of, I just have this picture that we're all kind of, you know, we've all kind of been thrown into the air and we want to sort of find each other and, yep, and figure that out. So yeah, I think you do a providential calendar opening. We'll, we'll Calvinist with that. I think so too. I, I, for a long time have believed that God is in charge of my schedule, which shouldn't be a radical proposition given that we believe that God is in charge of the world and my schedule said really tiny part of the world. So I can, you know, maybe I'll believe that God has providential governance over that too. Yep. Well, thank you, Dale. This has been a pleasure. Yes. Thank you. It was very much enjoyed it. All right. Take care. All right. Yep. Bye.